THE OKTOECHOS
TONE ONE
ON SATURDAY EVENING
AT LITTLE VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 4 Stichera:
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone I:
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
Receive our evening prayers, * O Holy Lord, * and grant us remission of sins;
* because Thou alone hast revealed ** the Resurrection to the world.
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
Receive our evening prayers, * O Holy Lord, * and grant us remission of sins;
* because Thou alone hast revealed ** the Resurrection to the world.
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
Go around Zion, O ye peoples, * and encompass her, * and give glory to him
who in her midst hath arisen from the dead; * for he is our God, ** and hath
delivered us from our iniquities.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
Come O ye peoples, * let us hymn and worship Christ * glorifying his
Resurrection from the dead: * for he is our God, ** who hath redeemed the world
from the wiles of the adversary.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion: in Tone I:
O my brethren! * let us celebrate today a pure festival, * Let creation leap for
joy, * let mankind dance, for the holy Theotokos hath called us together, * the
unsullied treasury of virginity, * the rational Paradise of the second Adam, * the
temple of the union of the two natures, * the solemn festival of the salvific
reconciliation, * the bridal chamber in which the Word hath wedded the flesh, *
the illumined cloud which truly carried incarnate Him who rideth upon the
Cherubim. * By her intercessions, O Christ God, ** do Thou save our souls.
Then “O Joyous Light ...”:
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...”, with its verses.
After “Vouchsafe O Lord ...”:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Theotokos, in Tone I: 
By thy Passion, O Christ, * we have been set free from passions, * and by thy
Resurrection we have been delivered from corruption. ** O Lord, glory be to
thee.
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation.
Thou hast been glorified in generations and generations, * O Mary, Maiden,
virgin mother and Theotokos, * the protection of the world, * who hast given
birth in the flesh to the Son of the Father * who hath no beginning; * the Son
who is truly co-eternal with the Spirit. ** Implore Him that we may be saved.
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear; * and forget
thine own people and thy father’s house.
We who are held fast by unseen afflictions * and have gained thee as our only
protection, * O pure Virgin, * cry aloud to thee with thanksgiving: * Save us, allholy Bride of God; ** for thou art the refuge of the world and the assistance of
our race.
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance.
The world hath been renewed by thy childbearing, * O most pure Maiden
Birthgiver of God, * salvation of the faithful and unsleeping protector * of those
who devoutly ask thee: * Cease not to intercede unceasingly ** on behalf of those
who sing thy praises.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
The Prophet named thee O Virgin, a Cloud of everlasting light, * for the Word
of the Father, Christ our God, * came forth from thee like dew upon the fleece *
and dawning from thee, * He hath enlightened the world and destroyed deception.
* Cease not to intercede we pray thee, * O most holy Lady, ** for us who confess
thee to be the true Theotokos.
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion. Then:
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone I:
When the stone had been sealed by the Jews, * And the soldiers were guarding
Thine immaculate Body, * Thou didst arise on the third day, O Savior, * granting
life unto the world. * Wherefore, the Hosts of the Heavens cried out to Thee, O
Life-giver: * Glory to Thy Resurrection, O Christ. * Glory to Thy kingdom. **
Glory to Thy dispensation, O only Lover of mankind.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
And the Dismissal.
AT GREAT VESPERS
On “Lord I have cried ...”, 10 Stichera: 7 Resurrection Stichera and 3 of the
Saint of the day, or 4 and 6 if the Menaion service is of Polyeleos rank.
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone I:
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.
Receive our evening prayers, * O Holy Lord, * and grant us remission of sins;
* because Thou alone hast revealed ** the Resurrection to the world.
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward
me.
Go around Zion, O ye peoples, * and encompass her, * and give glory to him
who in her midst hath arisen from the dead; * for he is our God, ** and hath
delivered us from our iniquities.
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear
my voice.
Come O ye peoples, * let us hymn and worship Christ * glorifying his
Resurrection from the dead: * for he is our God, ** who hath redeemed the world
from the wiles of the adversary.
Other Stichera, by Anatolius:
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication.
Rejoice, O ye heavens! * Sound the trumpets O ye foundations of the earth! *
O ye mountains thunder forth your joy! * for behold, Emmanuel hath nailed our
sins to the Cross, * and the giver of life, hath slain death * raising up Adam, ** as
He alone is the Lover of mankind.
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness.
Let us sing the praise of him * who was willingly crucified in the flesh for our
sakes, * suffered and was buried, and arose from the dead, * as we cry: * 'Establish
Thy Church in Orthodox belief, O Christ, * and grant peace unto our lives, ** as
Thou alone art good and the Lover of mankind'.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my
soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
As we the unworthy ones stand before Thy life-bearing tomb * we offer a
hymn of glory * to thine ineffable compassion, O Christ our God; * because Thou
didst accept the Cross and death, * O sinless one, * that Thou mightest grant
resurrection to the world, ** as Thou alone lovest mankind.
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
Let us sing the praises of the Word, * without beginning and co-eternal, with
the Father, * who came forth ineffably from a virgin womb, * willingly accepting
the Cross and Death for our sake * and arose in glory, * wherefore we cry aloud: *
'Giver of life, O Lord, glory be to thee, ** the Savior of our souls'.
Then the Stichera from the Menaion, with the following Verses:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
Glory from the Menaion, if appointed. Otherwise:
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., the Dogmatic Theotokion:
Let us hymn the whole world’s glory, * who sprang forth from mankind and
who gave birth to the Master, * the Portal of heaven, Mary the Virgin, * the hymn
of the Bodiless Powers and adornment of the faithful; * for she hath been
revealed as the Heaven and Temple of the Godhead. * By destroying the middle
wall, she hath brought forth peace, * and opened wide the Kingdom. * Therefore,
holding fast to her as a firm confirmation of the faith, * we have as our champion
the Lord born from her. * Take courage therefore, take courage, O ye people of
God; ** for as the Invincible one he shall conquer our adversaries.
After the Entrance and “O Joyous Light ...”,
Saturday Vespers Prokeimenon, in Tone VI:
The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty.
Verse: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself.
Verse: For He established the universe which shall not be shaken.
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone I:
By Thy Passion, O Christ, * we have been set free from passions, * and by
Thy Resurrection we have been delivered from corruption. ** O Lord, glory be to
thee.
Verse: The Lord is King: He is clothed with majesty. * The Lord is clothed
with strength and He hath girt Himself.
All ye His creation rejoice! * let the heavens be glad, * let the nations clap their
hands with gladness; * for Christ our Savior hath nailed our sins to the Cross *
and by slaying death hath granted us life eternal, * raising all of the fallen race of
Adam, ** as he alone is the Lover of mankind.
Verse: For He established the universe * which shall not be shaken.
Being the King of heaven and earth, * O Incomprehensible one, * Thou wast
willingly crucified through Thy love for mankind; * when Hades met thee he was
vexed, * while the souls of the righteous receiving thee below rejoiced, * and
Adam, seeing thee his Creator in the nethermost regions, rose again. * O the
wonder! * How did the life of all taste death? * Except that he wished to enlighten
the world, * which crieth out saying: * 'O Thou who didst arise from the dead, **
O Lord glory be to thee!'
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, * unto length of days.
Carrying sweet spices the myrrh-bearing women * reached Thy tomb with
haste, lamenting; * and not finding Thy most pure Body, * but learning from the
Angel the new and marvelous wonder, * spake unto the Apostles saying: * The
Lord hath arisen, ** granting the world His great mercy.
Glory from the Menaion, if appointed, otherwise:
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
Behold, the prophecy of Isaiah hath been fulfilled, * for a Virgin hath given
birth, * and after giving birth hath remained a Virgin as before. * For it was God
who was born from her; * therefore He began nature anew. * O Mother of God,
disdain not the supplications of Thy servants, * which are offered unto thee in
Thy temple; * since thou didst bear the Compassionate one in thine embrace, **
have pity on Thy servants, and beseech Him that our souls be saved.
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion. Then:
Tone IV:
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, **
for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice)
Note: If it is a regular Sunday Vigil, we chant “O Theotokos and Virgin ...”
(Thrice). If it is one of the 12 great feasts, we chant the Troparion of the feast
(Thrice). If it is a Sunday coinciding with some other feast, we chant “O
Theotokos and Virgin ...”, (Twice), and the Troparion of the Feast (Once).
And the Dismissal.
If a Vigil is not served, we chant (Once):
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone I:
When the stone had been sealed by the Jews, * And the soldiers were guarding
Thine immaculate Body, * Thou didst arise on the third day, O Savior, * granting
life unto the world. * Wherefore, the Hosts of the Heavens cried out to Thee, O
Life-giver: * Glory to Thy Resurrection, O Christ. * Glory to Thy kingdom. **
Glory to Thy dispensation, O only Lover of mankind.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., the Resurrection Theotokion, in Tone I:
When Gabriel announced to thee, “Rejoice!”, O Virgin, * the Master of all
became incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, * at his cry, as the righteous
David said. Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, * having
borne thy Creator. * Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! * Glory to
Him Who came forth from thee! ** Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy
birthgiving.
SATURDAY NIGHT: TONE I
COMPLINE
The priest saith: Blessed is our God..., and we respond: Amen. Glory to Thee,
our God, glory to Thee. О heavenly King..., Trisagion through Our Father. Lord,
have mercy (12 times). Glory..., Now & ever... О come, let us worship... (Thrice).
Psalm 50 (Have mercy on me, О God...); Psalm 69 (O God, be attentive unto
helping me...); and Psalm 142 (О Lord, hear my prayer...). Then, Glory to God in
the highest..., and the Symbol of Faith (I believe in one God...).
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos, in Tone I
ODE I
Irmos: Having been delivered from bitter slavery, * Israel traversed the
impassable as though dry land; * and beholding the enemy drowned, * they
chanted unto God as to their Redeemer, * Who worketh wonders with His
upraised arm, * for He hath been glorified.
Praising thee, О Queen of all, the captains of the angelic ranks were filled with
awe and fear, and every mind, because of thy goodness, hymneth thee as the Mot
her of the Creator; for thou hast surpassed every form of laudation, having given
birth to Christ.
Troubled by grievous temptations and afflicted by mine enemies, wretch that I
am, I cry out, weeping: Stretch forth thy hand to me from on high, О thou who
art exceeding rich, delivering me; and by thy supplications grant that I may live
free from danger.
Glory ..., With the balm of thy tender compassion heal thou the secret
transgressions of my soul, and calm the assaults of my flesh, О Theotokos; and,
turning back the spears and darts of the enemy upon them, do thou mightily
pierce their hearts.
Now & ever ..., Thy virginal womb which gave birth to Christ hath destroyed
the ancient pasture of the slayer of mankind; wherefore, all creation now rejoiceth,
О most pure one, having been restored to life, with one accord hymning thy Son
and God.
ODE III
Irmos: Let no mortal boast in his wisdom or wealth, * but rather in his faith
in the Lord, * crying out to Christ God in an Orthodox manner, * ever
chanting: do Thou Establish me O Master, * upon the rock of Thy
commandments! 
Once, the great Jacob, sleeping on the way, and beholding angels descending
from on high to the earth by a ladder, marveled, О Virgin; and, having awakened,
he clearly described thee beforehand as the portal of heaven.
Cast into misfortune by temporal restraint, wretch that I am, and beset by
perilous tempests, I cry aloud: Woe is me! О thou who gavest birth to God and
hast lifted up our horn, save me by thy supplications!
Glory ..., Stretching forth thy mighty hand from heaven, О Christ, King of all,
put Thou the heads of the enemies, perceptible and noetic, under the feet of those
who with faith proclaim Thy Mother to be the Theotokos, О my Jesus.
Now & ever ..., Isaiah, of old, purified by the burning coal of the Spirit, cried
out that a Son would manifestly be born of thy womb, О Virgin who art
exceeding rich, and to Whom in latter times thou hast given birth without a man
for my sake.
ODE IV
Irmos: Of old, Habbakuk heard wondrous report of Thee O Christ, * and
cried aloud in fear: * God shall come forth from Theman, * the Holy One
from the mountain overshadowed and densely wooded, * to save His
anointed ones! * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!
Thee, О Mother of God, hath the ruler of the world described beforehand as
comely and all-honored among women, as coming up from the wilderness, and
bearing Christ, thine Off­spring, in thine arms; and he cried: Glory to Thy power,
О Lord!
Incline thine ear unto me, О good one, behold mine oppression and the
increase of my tribulations! For, lifting up the eyes of my soul to thee, О Lady,
and bending my knees as I weep, I now pray, crying: Bring an end to the turmoil
of my temptations!
Glory ..., Knowing thee to be an unassailable rampart, moved to entreaty, I,
thy servant, now flee to thee, and I reckon the missiles of the enemy as impotent
as the darts of children, О thou who art exceeding rich. Wherefore, rejoicing, I
cry: Glory to thy birthgiving, О Mother of God!
Now & ever ..., The power of the Most High overshadowed thee with the
visitation of the divine Spirit, О Virgin, and then, beyond nature, the Lord of all,
having endowed flesh and soul with life, united them to Himself, bringing life
thereto and remaining in the same nature.
ODE V
Irmos: Do Thou shine forth O Christ Thy never-waning light * upon the
hearts of those who hymn Thee with faith, * granting us peace beyond
understanding; * Wherefore by Thy light we flee the night of ignorance *
coming unto the day, * glorifying Thee O Lover of mankind. 
Once, foreseeing thee, О all-hymned one, as a divine, unquarried mountain,
Daniel manifestly cried aloud: From thee let the Stone of divine generation be cut:
Christ, the Savior of the world! Honoring Him now, we the faithful praise thee, О
Bride of God.
I have fallen under many dangers, wretch that I am, and, praying with pain of
heart and weeping, I, thy servant, cry out unashamedly: О Birthgiver of God,
deliver my lowliness from besetting pains, and fill me with gladness!
Glory ..., Calm the raging sea of my passions by thy mighty supplication, О
good one who hast given birth to Christ without suffering, that, living now in
tranquility of soul, I may praise thee in hymns for the rest of my life.
Now & ever ..., Tell me: how bearest thou God in thine arms; and how dost
thou give suck to Him Who holdeth all things in His hand, О all-blessed Virgin?
And she said: “Having given birth unto Christ God, I remain pure, taking away
the debt of Adam and our first mother!”
ODE VI
Irmos: I am held fast in boundless passions, * and have fallen into the seamonster of evil; * but do Thou lead me up from corruption O God, * as
once Thou didst Jonah, * and by faith grant me dispassion, * that I may
offer a noetic sacrifice of praise and salvation * unto Thee.
Without departing from His place in the bosom of the Father, the pre-eternal
Son rested in the bosom of His Mother. He, Who with the Father is before the
ages, hath in latter times issued forth from the womb of the Virgin, leading all up
to life immortal in His ineffable goodness.
Bound through malice by the chains of the enemy, I have been cast down to
the bars of hell. Woe is me! Yet, appearing from heaven, О pure divine Maiden,
stand thou before me, thy servant, raising me up by thy supplications, and grant a
helping hand to me who hymn thy divine birthgiving.
Glory ..., Wretch that I am, I have fallen into the pit of destruction, and many
wild beasts surround me; yet, deflect their assaults by thy supplications, as with
stones, О Lady, and keep thy servant unharmed; for thou didst bear in thy womb
Christ, the Chief Cornerstone.
Now & ever ..., Of old, the choir of the divine prophets proclaimed the images
of thy birth­giving, О Virgin, calling thee the radiant cloud, the lampstand, the jar,
the table, the dew of heaven, the bread, the manna and the door, the throne and
the palace, the rod and paradise, in that thou hast given birth to Christ.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone I:
Fleeing with love for thy goodness, we all know thee to be the Mother of God,
who wast truly revealed as a virgin even after giving birth; for we sinners have thee
as our intercessor, and we have acquired thee as our salvation amid misfortunes,
the only all-immaculate one.
ODE VII
Irmos: Having passed through the unbearable flame of the furnace * as
though it were a bridal-chamber, * the children who for the sake of piety, *
were revealed as holy * chanted together, singing the hymn: * O God of our
fathers, blessed art Thou!
The Pre-eternal One, passing through thine impassable doors, О Queen of all,
preserved the tokens of thy virginity pure and intact, even after giving birth.
Wherefore, we cry aloud: О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!
Cast into the furnace, I am consumed by the sevenfold flames of soul-slaying
perils; yet do thou thyself rain down dew upon me by thine entreaties, О good
Lady, that I may cry: Blessed is the God of our fathers!
Glory ..., Having grown old through the passions, through unremitting
misfortunes and tribulations, and having reached the sunset of my life devoid of
the virtues and devoured by slothfulness, I cry to thee, О Lady: О consolation of
mortals, have mercy on me!
Now & ever ..., Worshipping the Trinity in Unity in an Orthodox manner, and
proclaiming thee, О pure Virgin Mother, to be the one who gave birth to God in
the flesh, in a godly manner we mortals chant: О God of our fathers, blessed art
Thou!
ODE VIII
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a
wonder past nature, * burning not the Children whom it had received, * so
the fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin's womb * into which it
had descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation
bless the Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.
The supremely true word of the priest prefigured thy birthgiving, О Virgin; for
thou didst truly give birth to the Word of God, and thy womb, through which
God passed, He did not rend apart. Wherefore, rejoicing as is meet, with one
accord we hymn thee, the Theotokos, as is due, and exalt thee, the pure one,
throughout all ages.
With divine fire burn up the uncultivated thorns which have grown up in my
soul, О most pure one, and by thy supplications raise me up to the virtues, that I
may bear fruit for Christ; for the ever-living Flower, having sprung forth from
thee, hath adorned all creation. Wherefore, we honor thee, the pure Theotokos,
throughout all ages.
Glory ..., Quickly and painlessly grant me healing amid evils, О Birthgiver of
God; for, having fallen into afflictions and perils, wretch that I am, I invoke thy
quickness to help, lamenting. Wherefore, О most pure one, hasten thou to rescue
me and save me from every torment, that, blessing thee, I may hymn thy
birthgiving.
Now & ever ..., Of old, the rod of Aaron that budded forth prefigured thee, О
Virgin; for, budding forth, thou alone hast given birth without a man, having now
received the Rain of heaven in thy womb. Wherefore, in gladness we hymn thee,
the Theotokos, as is due, and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.
ODE IX
Irmos: Ineffable is the mystery of the Virgin: * for she is heaven and the
throne of the cherubim, * and hath been revealed as the radiant bridalchamber * of Christ God Almighty. * Wherefore we piously magnify her as
the Theotokos.
Most glorious is the mystery of the Virgin! For Him Whom the vast spaces
above the heavens could not contain was contained within her womb. Wherefore,
assembling, we call her blessed, and in gladness we magnify her with faith.
Seeing thee alone as higher than the heavens, the radiance of God, the throne
of the cherubim and the bridal chamber, the holy couch, О undefiled one, we
mortals, praising Christ our God, magnify Him to Whom thou hast given birth
through thy pure loins.
Glory ..., Round about me are many afflictions; and evil misfortunes, sickness
and grievous sins, now assailing me, have cast me into the pit. Wherefore, in the
bitterness of my soul, I pray: О most holy Theotokos, find deliverance for me!
Now & ever ..., Through the entreaties of the pure divine Maiden, О Christ,
bring peace to the world, casting the power of the enemy down beneath the feet
of the faithful and, establishing unutterable tranquility thereby, preserve it
throughout all ages.
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and the rest as usual. Dismissal.
SUNDAY MORNING: TONE I
NOCTURNS
The priest saith: “Blessed is our God ...”, and we say: Amen. Glory to Thee,
our God, glory to Thee. О heavenly King... Trisagion through Our Father... Priest:
For Thine is the kingdom ..., And we say: Amen. Lord, have mercy (12 times),
Glory..., Now & ever..., О come, let us worship (Thrice). Psalm 50 (Have mercy
on me, О God...)
And then, the Canon to the Holy & Life-creating Trinity, the acrostic whereof
is “I hymn Thee, the one three-Sunned Essence”, the composition of
Metrophanes of Smyrna, in Tone I:
ODE I
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it
shattered the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the
deep.
Refrain: О most holy Trinity, our God, glory be to Thee!
Never silent, the seraphim glorify the one Cause in three Hypostases,
beginningless, eternal, all-creating, unapproachable: Whom every tongue faithfully
honoreth with hymns.
That Thou mightest reveal to men Thy single, Thrice-effulgent divinity to
men, creating man of old Thou didst form him according to Thine image,
bestowing upon him mind, word and spirit, in that Thou lovest mankind.
Glory ..., Showing forth from on high one dominion in three divine
hypostases, О Father, Thou didst say to Thy Son, Who is equal to Thee in activity,
and to the Spirit: Come ye and, descending, let us confuse their tongues.
Now & ever ..., The Father is the beginningless Mind Who in times past was
spoken of by the most wise ones in images; the Word is equally without beginning
and consubstantial; and the Holy Spirit is He Who wrought the incarnation of the
Word within the Virgin.
ODE III
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind!
Of old thou didst clearly manifest Thyself unto Abraham in three Hypostases,
one in the essence of divinity; and in images thou didst reveal the utter truth of
theology. Thee do we hymn with faith, the three-Sunned God Who alone hath
dominion.
О Father, the immutable Son, Who as God was begotten of Thee, without
corruption, shone forth, Light from Light; and the divine Spirit proceeded as
Light. We faithfully worship and glorify the effulgence of the three Hypostases of
the one Godhead.
Glory ..., The unity of the Trinity is supra-naturally, ineffably and in a manner
past understanding glorified by the noetic beings, who unceasingly utter praise
with thrice-holy voices; and with them the Lord in three Hy­postases is also
hymned by us with one accord.
Now & ever ..., From thee, He Who transcendeth time issued forth within
time without seed: the Invisible One made Himself like unto us, teaching us the
single Essence and Dominion of the Father, the Son and the Spirit, О Theotokos;
wherefore, we glorify thee.
Lord, have mercy. (Thrice)
Sessional hymn, in Tone I:
Spec. Mel..: “Thy tomb, О Savior ...”:
Let us all worship the Father and the Son, and the upright Spirit Who is equal
to them. Glory to the uncreated Trinity, the supremely divine Power, Whom the
ranks of the incorporeal beings glorify! This day let us who are born on earth
praise Him faithfully with fear.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
To the path of repentance guide us who ever stray into the trackless wastes of
evil and anger the supremely good Lord, О blessed Mary who knewest not
wedlock, thou refuge of those who despair, and the dwelling-place of God.
ODE IV
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain
overshadowed by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy
One of Israel * would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and
restoration.
Shine upon me the splendors of Thy deifying effulgence, О three-Sunned
Godhead, that the beauty of Thy divine radiance, which passeth understanding,
and the sweet and light-giving communion thereof, may be perceived by the eyes
of my heart.
Of old, Thou didst establish the heavens and all their power by Thine allaccomplishing Word and the consubstantial Spirit of Thy mouth, О Lord, with
Whom Thou hast dominion over all things in the thrice-effulgent sole dominion
of the Godhead.
Glory ..., In that Thou hast created me according to Thine image and likeness,
О divine and all-accomplishing Trinity, Thou uncommingled Unity, give me
understanding and enlighten me, that I may do Thy holy will, which is good and
perfect in strength.
Now & ever ..., Thou hast given birth. О most pure one, to the supremely
divine Son, One of the Trinity, Who became incarnate from thee for our sake,
illumining mortals with the never-waning light and radiance of the three-Sunned
Godhead.
ODE V
Irmos: Thou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O
Christ, * and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, * enlighten
with the light of thine understanding * the hearts of those who with right
worship hymn Thee.
О Trinity Who hast sole dominion, Who wast well pleased that the pristine
array of the angels be made resplendent by the unapproachable rays of Thy
beauty, with Thine effulgence enlighten those who hymn Thee in an Orthodox
manner.
Now nature which, in Thy goodness Thou didst bring into existence, hymneth
Thee, the only three-Sunned Godhead, asking deliverance from transgressions and
perils, from misfortunes and tribulations.
Glory ..., With faith we glorify the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the one
Essence and Godhead, indivisibly separate, the one God of creation visible and
invisible.
Now & ever ..., All the sayings of the prophets described beforehand thine
Offspring, Whom, ineffable and not easily described, we have come to know as
our Initiator into the mystery of the one, three-Sunned Godhead, О most pure
one.
ODE VI
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to
deliver us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * save
Thy people O our God, * for thou art the strength and restoration of the
weak.
Being equal in power and identical in will, О transcendent Trinity, Thou art a
simple and indivisible Unity; wherefore, preserve us by Thy power. (Twice)
Glory ..., By thy will, in that Thou art good, Thou didst form everything from
all the ages out of nothing, О unapproachable Trinity, and Thou didst like­wise
create man. Deliver me now from every evil circumstance.
Now & ever ..., Thou wast the dwelling-place of the never-setting Sun Who
omnipotently created the great luminaries and set them in their ranks, О most
pure Virgin Bride of God; deliver me now from the darkness of the passions.
Lord, have mercy. (Thrice)
Sessional hymn, in Tone I:
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, О Savior ...”:
О ye mortals, with fear let us worship the Holy Trinity, the indivisible Essence,
Who is distinct in three Hypostases without being separated, and abideth
indivisibly in the essence of the Godhead; and let us glorify the supremely good
God as Creator and Master.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Guide aright my wretched soul, О pure one, and have pity on it which, for the
multitude of my transgressions, hath stumbled headlong into the pit of
destruction, О all-immaculate one; and at the dread hour of my death rescue it
from the accusing demons and from every torment.
ODE VII
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace;
* for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so
hath He wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou
praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers.
О Word of God, consubstantial Effulgence of the omnipotent God: As Thou
hast promised, in that Thou art compassionate, with Thy Father and Spirit
accomplish the deifying indwelling which is in Thee; and show me forth as
repug­nant to the demons and the passions. (Twice)
Glory ..., That Thou mightest show us the depth of Thy compassion, О
Master, Thou didst send Thy Son unto our lowliness, and restored it to its pristine
splendor. And now bring me understanding through the divine Spirit.
Now & ever ..., The King of all, Who is up-borne upon the throne of the
cherubim, made His abode within thy virginal womb, О most pure one, to deliver
all from corruption, in that He is the Lover of mankind. Preserve us now by thy
supplications.
ODE VIII
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a
wonder past nature, * burning not the Children whom it had received, * so
the fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin's womb * into which it
had descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation
bless the Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.
By a deifying command, О Lord of all, Almighty One in three Hypostases,
Thou didst stretch out the heavens like a skin; and suspended the mass of the
earth with Thine omnipotent hand. Wherefore, strengthen Thy servants with faith
and Thy love, О Lover of mankind, that with longing we may glorify Thee
forever. (Twice)
Glory ..., О three-Sunned light of Hypostases, Who art one in essence, with
divine light illumine those who hymn thee, that they may ever gaze upon Thy
light-creating rays, by which am I filled with Thy sweet, light-giving and most rich
glory, and with faith supremely exalt Thee throughout all ages.
Now & ever ..., Having assumed human nature without change, thy Son
ascended into the heavens, О most pure Theotokos, delivering mankind from the
ancient corruption by the excellence of His goodness. To Him do we sing in
thanksgiving: Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout
all ages!
ODE IX
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy
pure birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: *
quench the raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may
unceasingly magnify Thee.
О most holy and consubstantial Trinity, Thou Savior of creation, material and
noetic, save Thy servants from the attack and oppression of the enemy, and ever
preserve Thy flock unharmed. (Twice)
Glory ..., That Thou mightest show forth the incalculable depths of Thy
goodness, Thou didst make us promises of salvation. О three-Sunned and
omnipotent God Who hast sole dominion, grant that Thy servants may do them.
Now & ever ..., Look down upon our supplications, О Thou one God Who in
truth art believed to be in three divine Hypostases, and grant consolation to Thy
servants, through the supplications of the most pure and all-hymned Mother of
God.
Then, the hymn of Gregory the Sinaite.
(which, is chanted every Sunday after the canon)
It is truly meet to glorify Thee, the Word of God, before Whom the cherubim
tremble and quake, and Whom the hosts of heaven glorify. And with fear we
glorify Christ, the Bestower of life, Who rose from the tomb on the third day.
With divine songs let us all in godly manner hymn the Father, the Son and the
Spirit divine, the Might in three Hypostases, the one Sovereignty and Dominion,
Whom all mortals hymn and the hosts of heaven glorify, the essential Unity in
three Hypostases, Who is worshipped with faith by all.
We magnify Thee, the Godhead, the Lord of the cherubim, the incomparable
divine Origin of the seraphim, the indivisible Trinity in Unity.
I worship God: the beginningless Father, the Son Who is equally without
beginning, and the Spirit. With hymns let us honor the one indivisible and unified
Essence, the threefold Unity.
Shine forth Thy dazzling lightning flashes upon me, О my God in three
Hypostases, Creator of all, and show me to be a splendid, luminous and
unshakable habitation of Thine unapproachable glory.
With fear let us glorify Christ the Bestower of life, Who ineffably became
incarnate from the Virgin, for the cherubim tremble and quake before Him, and
the angelic armies glorify Him.
The rest of Nocturnes, and the dismissal.
SUNDAY MORNING: TONE I
AT MATINS
On “God is The Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, in Tone I:
When the stone had been sealed by the Jews, * And the soldiers were guarding
Thine immaculate Body, * Thou didst arise on the third day, O Savior, * granting
life unto the world. * Wherefore, the Hosts of the Heavens cried out to Thee, O
Life-giver: * Glory to Thy Resurrection, O Christ. * Glory to Thy kingdom. **
Glory to Thy dispensation, O only Lover of mankind. (Twice)
Glory ..., the Troparion from the Menaion, otherwise; Glory ..., Now & Ever ...,
The Theotokion, in Tone I, (or in the Tone of that from the Menaion):
When Gabriel announced to thee, “Rejoice!”, O Virgin, * the Master of all
became incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, * at his cry, as the righteous
David said. Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, * having
borne thy Creator. * Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! * Glory to
Him Who came forth from thee! ** Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy
birthgiving
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma II), the Sessional hymns of the
Resurrection, in Tone I:
While watching Thy grave, the soldiers * became as dead men from the
lightning flash of the Angel * who appeared and proclaimed to the Women the
Resurrection. * We glorify Thee, the destroyer of corruption; * we fall down
before Thee, * who hath risen from the grave ** and who alone art our God.
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted on high; * forget not
Thy paupers to the end.
Thou wast willingly nailed to the Cross, * O Compassionate one, * and laid in
a tomb as a mortal, * O Giver of life. * By Thy death, O Powerful one, * Thou
hast smashed its might; * for Hades’ gatekeepers trembled before Thee; * Thou
hast raised with Thee the dead from every age, ** for Thou alone lovest mankind.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
All we who with love flee for refuge to thy goodness * know thee to be the
Mother of God * and after childbirth still truly Virgin; * for we sinners have thee
as our protection; * we have thee as our salvation in misfortunes, ** as the only
All-immaculate one.
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma III),
The Sessional hymns of the Resurrection, in Tone I:
The women came to Thy tomb at dawn * and seeing a vision of an Angel they
trembled; * the tomb became resplendent with life; * and amazed by the miracle, *
they returned to the disciples and proclaimed the Resurrection: * for Christ hath
despoiled Hades, * as alone almighty and all powerful, * raising up those in
corruption, * dispelling the fear of condemnation ** by the power of the Cross.
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all
Thy wonders.
O Life of all, Thou wast nailed to the Cross; * O immortal Lord, Thou wast
numbered among the dead, * arising on the third day, O Savior, * raising Adam
from corruption; * wherefore the heavenly Powers cried out to Thee: * 'O Giver
of life, * Glory to Thy sufferings, O Christ; * glory to Thy Resurrection; * glory to
Thy condescension, ** O only Lover of mankind'.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
O Mary, holy tabernacle of the Master, * raise us up who have fallen into the
pit of wicked despair, * of transgressions and afflictions; * for thou art the
salvation, * the help and the mighty protection of sinners, ** and thou dost save
thy servants.
If a POLYELEOS is appointed, we chant: (Select verses):
Verse: Praise ye the name of the Lord; O ye servants, praise the Lord.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
Verse: Blessed is the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth in Jerusalem. Alleluia,
alleluia, alleluia.
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy
endureth forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
Verse: O give thanks unto the God of Heaven; for His mercy endureth
forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
(On the Sunday of the Prodigal Son, Meat-Fare, and Cheese-Fare Sundays,
after the Polyeleos we chant Psalm 136: “By the rivers of Babylon…")
Then, the Megalynarion of the feast is chanted, if there is one, with the
selected psalm verse. However, if it is a Sunday, in general parish practice the
Megalynarion is chanted only once, without the psalm verse, unless it is a Great
feast of the Lord, or the Theotokos.
The Resurrectional Verses (THE EVLOGITARIA)
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
The assembly of angels was amazed, * beholding Thee numbered among the
dead; * yet, O Savior, * destroying the stronghold of death, * and with Thyself
raising up Adam, ** Thou hast freed all from Hades.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
Why mingle ye myrrh with tears of pity, * O ye women disciples? * Thus said
the radiant angel within the tomb * addressing the myrrh-bearing women; *
behold the tomb and understand, ** for the Savior hath arisen from the tomb.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
Very early * the myrrh-bearing women hastened * unto Thy tomb, lamenting,
* but the angel stood before them and said: * the time for lamentation is passed,
weep not, ** but tell the apostles of the Resurrection.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
The myrrh-bearing women, * with myrrh came to Thy tomb, O Savior,
bewailing, * but the angel addressed them, saying: * Why number ye the living
among the dead, * for as God ** He is risen from the tomb.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
Let us worship the Father, * and His Son, and the Holy Spirit, * the Holy
Trinity, * one in essence, * crying with the Seraphim: ** Holy, Holy, Holy art
Thou, O Lord.
Both Now & ever ..., and unto the ages of ages, Amen..
In bringing forth the Giver of life, * thou hast delivered Adam from sin, O
Virgin, * and hast brought joy to Eve * instead of sorrow; * and those fallen from
life * have thereunto been restored, ** by Him Who of thee was incarnate, God
and man.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice).
Then the little Litany and:
The Sessional Hymn:
The Thief’s repentance plundered Paradise, * but the Myrrh-bearers’
lamentations announced the joy that Thou hast risen, * O Christ God, ** granting
the world great mercy.
The Songs of Ascent: 1st Antiphon:
When I am afflicted, * I cry unto Thee, O Lord, ** hearken unto my pains.
For those who dwell in the desert * the longing for God never ceases, ** for
they are far from the vanity of this world.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ...,
To the Holy Spirit, as to the Father and the Son, * are due honor and glory; **
thus let us sing to the Trinity, a single power.
2nd Antiphon:
Having lifted me up to the summit of Thy laws, * make me shine with virtues,
O God, ** that I may sing Thy praises.
Take me with Thy right hand, O Word, * guard me and keep me, ** lest the
fire of sin scorch me.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ...,
In the Holy Spirit all creation is made new * and hastens back to its original
condition; ** for He is equal in strength to the Father and the Word.
3rd Antiphon:
With those who said unto me: * 'Let us journey to the courts of the Lord', **
my Spirit was gladdened and my heart rejoiceth.
In the house of David is great fear; * for when the thrones are set therein, **
all the tribes and nations of the earth will be judged.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ...,
To the Holy Spirit must be offered honor, adoration, glory and power, * as
befits also the Father and the Son; ** for the Trinity is a Unity, one in essence, but
not in Hypostases.
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: Now will I arise, saith the Lord; I will establish
them in salvation, * I will be manifest therein..
The Verse: The words of the Lord are pure words, silver that is fired, tried
in the earth, brought to sevenfold purity.
Let every breath ...,
The Sunday Resurrection Gospel. Then:
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord
Jesus, * the only sinless One. * We venerate Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy holy
Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we know none
other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye faithful, * let us
worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the Cross joy hath
come to all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His Resurrection; *
for, having endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by death.
Psalm 50, Then:
Glory ..., in Tone VI:
Through the prayers of the Apostles * O Merciful One, ** blot out the
multitude of our transgressions.
Now & Ever ..., in Tone VI:
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the
multitude of our transgressions.
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according
to the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions.
Jesus having risen from the grave, * as He foretold, * hath given us life eternal,
** and great mercy.
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...”, Then the Canons:
Resurrection Canon Tone I.
ODE I
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it
shattered the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the
deep.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
As God, working with immaculate hands, Thou hast fashioned me in the
beginning from dust, and now stretching out those hands on the Cross, Thou
didst recall from the earth my corruptible body, which Thou hast taken from the
Virgin.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
He, who by divinely breathing upon me placed a soul in me, hath willingly
submitted to be slain for me and thus delivering his soul to death hath freed my
soul from the eternal bonds, raising it with Himself, and glorifying it with
incorruption.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Rejoice! source of grace, Rejoice! ladder and gate of heaven,
Rejoice! lamp-stand and golden jar, the un-hewn mountain, that bore unto the
world, Christ the Giver of life.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Christ's incarnation maketh me divine, Christ's humility exalteth me, and by
suffering the passion in the flesh, Christ the Giver of life maketh me
dispassionate, wherefore I sing a hymn of thanksgiving, for He hath been
glorified.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Having endured crucifixion, Christ exalteth me, having put death to death,
Christ hath raised me up with himself, granting me life, wherefore I clap my hands
in gladness singing a song of victory to the Savior, for gloriously hath He been
glorified.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Most pure Virgin, thou hast conceived God, and in virginity,
thou hast given birth to Christ incarnate from thee, in person the one and onlybegotten Son, known in two natures, for He is glorified.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
What hymn worthy of thee can our weakness offer unto thee? If not only the
joyful one Gabriel revealed unto us: 'Rejoice! O Theotokos, Virgin Mother who
knewest not wedlock!'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Unto the Ever-virgin and Mother of the King of the highest Powers, let us the
faithful cry in spirit from hearts most pure: 'Rejoice! O Theotokos, Virgin Mother
who knewest not wedlock!'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Immeasurable is the abyss of thine incomprehensible child-bearing, O all-pure
one; therefore with undoubting faith we offer thee our song: 'Rejoice! O
Theotokos, Virgin Mother who knewest not wedlock!'
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE III
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind!
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
As Thou art my God, O Good one, Thou hast taken compassion upon me,
fallen as I was, deigning to come down to me, and exalting me through Thy
crucifixion that I may cry unto Thee: 'Holy art Thou the Lord of glory, in
goodness beyond compare!'
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
O Christ, as the hypostatic Life and as compassionate God, Thou hast clothed
Thyself with me, the corrupted one, descending, O Master, unto the dust of death,
destroying the power of death, and arising on the third day, whereby Thou hast
clothed me with incorruption.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Having conceived God in thy womb, O Virgin, by the Most holy
Spirit, thou hast remained unburned, like the bush that burnt before Moses the
lawgiver yet remained unburned, clearly foretelling of thee who received the
unendurable fire.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
To Christ God, who took the wandering sheep upon his shoulders and
through a tree destroyed his sin, let us cry aloud: 'Thou Who hast exalted the horn
of Thy faithful, Holy art thou, O Lord!'
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Unto Him who brought up from Hades Christ the great shepherd and by his
priestly power, through the Apostles, shepherded in wisdom all the nations, let us
in truth by the divine Spirit give adoration.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Unto the Son who without seed wast willingly incarnate from a
Virgin, and who by his divine power kept her a pure Virgin after child-bearing, to
the God of all, let us cry aloud: 'Holy art thou, O Lord!'
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Truthfully, O Virgin, following the words of the Prophet, we name thee the
light cloud; for from thee the Lord hath come to overthrow the idols of Egypt,
made by men, and to enlighten those who served them.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The choir of Prophets hath truly named thee the sealed fountain and the shut
gate, clearly depicting for us the symbols of thy virginity, O All-praised one, which
Thou didst preserve even after childbirth.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O all-immaculate Virgin, Gabriel, enabled as far as is possible to know the
mind of God, brought thee a message of great gladness, plainly disclosing the
conception of the Word, and proclaiming thine ineffable childbirth. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
The small litany:
ODE IV
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain
overshadowed by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy
One of Israel * would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and
restoration.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Who is this Savior that cometh from Edom, wearing a crown of thorns, His
garments reddened, and hanging on a tree? He is the Holy one of Israel, who hath
come for our salvation and restoration.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Behold, O ye disobedient people, and be ashamed! For He whom ye in your
madness begged Pilate to hang upon a cross as a malefactor hath abolished the
power of death, and in a manner befitting God, arisen from the tomb.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: We know thee to be the tree of life, O Virgin; for it was not the
fruit which bringeth death that budded from thee, but rather the delight of eternal
life and the salvation of us who hymn thee.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Who is this fair one from Edom, His garments dyed scarlet with the grapes of
Bosor? He is as comely as God and as a mortal He hath reddened his robe with
the blood of His flesh. To Him we the faithful sing: 'Glory to Thy power, O
Lord!'
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Christ, appearing as a high priest of the blessings to come, hath destroyed our
sin, and showing a strange way by His blood, hath hastened unto a greater and
more perfect tabernacle, and is thus our guide into that Holy Place.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Thou didst pay the ancient debt of Eve, O All-praised one, by the
new Adam who hath come forth for our sake. For uniting to himself from a pure
conception rational and living flesh, Christ came forth from thee, as one Lord in
both natures.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Hear wonders, O heaven, take note, O earth, for a daughter of the earthly,
fallen Adam hath been declared the Mother of God and of her Creator, for our
salvation and restoration.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
We praise Thy great and awesome mystery; for unknown to the Commanders
of the armies beyond this world, the One Who hath descended upon thee, like
dew upon the fleece, O All-praised one, hath done so for our salvation and
restoration.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O All-praised Theotokos, Holy of Holies, expectation of the nations, and the
salvation of the faithful, from thee hath dawned the Redeemer and Giver of life
and our Lord. Entreat him that thy servants may be saved.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE V
Irmos: Thou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O
Christ, * and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, *
enlighten with the light of thine understanding * the hearts of those
who with right worship hymn Thee.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
The Jews put to death on the Tree of the Cross the great shepherd and Lord;
but from death’s might He hath rescued like sheep the dead buried in Hades.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
When Thou didst announce the glad tidings of peace by Thy cross and
proclaimed deliverance for captives, O my Savior, then didst Thou, O Christ, put
to shame him who held them captive revealing him as naked and destitute by Thy
Divine Arising.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: O All-praised one, despise not the prayers of those who faithfully
entreat thee, but accept them, O Pure one, and convey them to thy Son, our God
and only benefactor; for in thee we have acquired a protectress.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
O the riches and depth of the wisdom of God! The Lord who snareth the wise
hath ransomed us from their trickery; for having suffered willingly in the
feebleness of the flesh, He hath been raised from the dead by His own life-giving
strength.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Being God, Christ united Himself to flesh for our sake, and hath been
crucified, and died, and hath been buried, and arisen again, ascending up to the
Father with His own flesh, with which He will come again to save those who
devoutly serve Him.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: O Pure Virgin, Holy of Holies, Thou hast given birth to the Holy
one of the Holy, who sanctifieth all, Christ the Redeemer, wherefore we proclaim
thee as the Queen and Sovereign Lady of all, as the Mother of the Creator of all
that is.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Beholding thee, the Powers of heaven are made glad, and with them rejoiceth
the assemblies of mortals; for they have been united, O Virgin Theotokos, by
thine offspring; whom we worthily glorify.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Let every mortal tongue and mind be roused to the praise of mortal man’s true
adornment; the Virgin clearly standeth by the Lord, glorifying those who with
faith sing the praises of her wonders.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Every song and every praise of the wise offered to the Virgin and Theotokos
is worthy of praise, for she hath become the temple of the most high glory of
God; whom as is fitting, we glorify.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE VI
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to
deliver us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * save
Thy people O our God, * for thou art the strength and restoration of the
weak.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Through the transgression of the first-formed man, O Lord, we were
grievously wounded; but by Thy wounds, by which Thou wast afflicted for our
sakes, O Christ, we have been healed; for Thou art the strength and restoration of
the feeble.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Thou hast led us up from Hades, O Lord, by destroying the all-devouring
whale of the deep, O All-powerful one, and destroying his power by Thy might;
for Thou art the life and the light and the resurrection.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: The Forefathers of mankind rejoice in thee, immaculate Virgin,
for through thee they regain Eden, which they had lost through transgression; for
thou art pure both before child-bearing and after giving birth.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
O Christ God, being dispassionate in mind and immaterial, Thou dost mingle
with the human mind by the means of the Divine nature and the coarseness of the
flesh; and wast wholly united to the whole of me without change, that by being
crucified Thou mightest hand salvation to the whole of me, who had fallen.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Having tripped, Adam hath fallen and been crushed, cheated of his hope of
deification, but the new Adam hath arisen, deified by the union of the Word, and
by the Passion gaining dispassion, He is glorified as the Son enthroned with the
Father and the Spirit.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Not leaving the bosom of His Begetter, Who is without
beginning, He lodgeth and cometh to rest in the womb of a pure Maiden, He that
is without a mother hath become incarnate without a father, the God of
righteousness who reigneth as king, His fearful and ineffable generation is without
genealogy.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The heavenly Ranks stand beside thine Offspring like servants, fittingly struck
with amazement at thy seedless child-bearing, O Ever-virgin; for thou art pure
both before bearing child and after giving birth.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The Word, who before was without flesh, and who made the universe by His
will, who brought the armies of the Bodiless ones into being out of nothing, as
All-powerful, became incarnate from thee, O Most pure one.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The foe hath been slain by thy life-bearing fruit, and Hades hath been
trampled under foot, O thou who art Full of God’s grace, and we who were
chained have been freed; wherefore I cry out: 'Deliver me from the passions of
my heart!'
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
The small litany:
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone I:
Thou didst arise from the grave in glory as God * and thus raised up the world
with Thee; * and mortal nature singeth Thy praises as God, * and death hath
disappeared; * Adam danceth, O Master, * and now Eve, freed from her chains, *
rejoiceth as she cries aloud: ** It is Thee, O Christ, who grantest the Resurrection
to all.
Ikos: Let us praise as God all-powerful the One who hath risen on the third
day, smashing the gates of Hades and rousing the age-long dead from the grave,
who hath appeared to the Myrrh-bearers, as it was His good pleasure to say to
them first: Rejoice! and thus revealing joy to the Apostles, as alone the Giver of
life. Therefore with faith the Women proclaim the tokens of victory to the
Disciples; Hades groaneth, Death lamenteth, the world exulteth and all rejoice
together; for Thou, O Christ, hast granted the Resurrection to all.
ODE VII
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace;
* for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so
hath He wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou
praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
The earth did shudder, the sun was hidden, and light was enveloped in
darkness, the sacred veil of the Temple was rent in twain and the rocks were rent
asunder; for the Just One hath tasted death upon the cross; O Thou praised and
supremely glorified God of our fathers.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
When Thou, the highly exalted one, didst willingly become as one helpless and
slain among the dead for our sakes, Thou didst set us all free, and with a lofty arm,
didst raise us up together with Thee, O Thou praised and supremely glorified God
of our fathers.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Rejoice, spring of eternal water! Rejoice, Paradise of delight!
Rejoice, wall of the faithful! Rejoice, Bride who kneweth not wedlock! Rejoice, joy
of all the world! through whom the God of our fathers hath dawned unto us,
praised and glorified above all.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Of old the earth was cursed, made crimson with the blood of Abel by the
murdering hand of a brother; but bedewed by Thy divine blood it is blessed and
leaping for joy crieth out: 'O God of our Fathers, blessed art Thou!'
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Let the people of the Jews, opposed to God, lament the reckless deed of
putting Christ to death; but let the gentiles be glad and clap their hands and cry
aloud: 'O God of our Fathers, blessed art Thou!'
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Lo, the dazzling Angel crieth out to the Myrrh-bearing Women, 'Come, see the
tokens of Christ’s Resurrection, the graves clothes and the tomb, and cry aloud: O
God of our Fathers, blessed art Thou!'
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Jacob prophetically discerned thee in the ladder, O Theotokos; for through
thee the Highly Exalted was well-pleased to appear and make His abode among
mankind: O Thou praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Rejoice, Adam’s most revered fleece! The Shepherd, the highly exalted One,
came forth from thee, truly clothed in my whole nature, through His ineffable
compassion: O Thou praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
God Who is before all ages hath truly become the new Adam from thy pure
blood; beseech him now to make me, who am old and worn out, renewed as I cry:
'O Thou praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers'.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE VIII
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite children shone
more brightly than gold * with the beauty of godliness, * as they exclaimed:
Bless the Lord all ye his works, * hymn and exalt him supremely
throughout all ages.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
O Word of God, Thou Who by Thy will maketh and transformeth all things,
by Thy Passion Thou hast transformed the shadow of death into everlasting life,
wherefore we and all Thy works unceasingly praise Thee as Lord, and supremely
exalt Thee throughout all ages.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
By rising on the third day, O Christ, Thou hast destroyed the misery and
destruction within the gates and strongholds of Hades. Unceasingly all Thy works
praise Thee as Lord, and supremely exalt Thee throughout all ages.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Let us praise her who without seed and beyond nature brought
forth Christ the precious pearl from the divine flesh crying: 'All ye His works bless
the Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.'
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Come, O ye peoples, let us worship the place upon which stood Christ’s
immaculate feet, and where His divine, life-giving palms were stretched out on the
Tree for the salvation of all mortals; and let us circle the tomb of life, singing, 'Let
all creation bless the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.'
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
The lawless slander of the Jews who slew God hath been refuted; for He
Whom they called a deceiver, hath been raised as all-powerful, making a mockery
of the seals of the lawless ones. Wherefore rejoicing let us sing: 'Let all creation
bless the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.'
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
The most pure Seraphim, as they praise the glory of the one lordship in thriceholy hymns, like free slaves glorify with fear the three-hypostatic Godhead. With
them we also devoutly sing, 'Let all creation bless the Lord, and supremely exalt
Him throughout all ages.'
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Let us all hymn the praise of the resplendent Bridal Chamber, from which
Christ, the Master of all, came forth as a bridegroom, as we sing: 'All ye His works
bless the Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Rejoice!, glorious throne of God! Rejoice! wall of the faithful, through whom
Christ, the light, hath dawned for those in darkness, who call Thee blest and cry:
'All ye His works bless the Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him throughout all
ages.'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Cause of our salvation, who bore the Lord, Virgin all-praised, intercede for all
who devoutly cry: 'All ye His works bless the Lord, praise and supremely exalt
Him throughout all ages.'
After the Troparia from the Menaion for ODE VIII, we chant:
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely
exalting Him throughout all ages.
And then the appointed Katavasia:
After which we chant the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (the Magnificat)
Note: on great feasts special Megalynarion are chanted in place of the Magnificat:
Verse: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in
God my Savior.
And after each Verse:
Refrain: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more
glorious than the Seraphim; * who without corruption gavest birth to God the
Word, ** the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; * for
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: For the Mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His
name; * and His mercy is on them that fear Him * unto generation and
generation.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: He hath showed strength with His arm, * and He hath scattered the
proud in the imagination of their heart.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: He hath put down the mighty from their seat, * and exalted them of
low degree; * He hath filled the hungry with good things, * and the rich He
hath sent empty away.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: He hath holpen His servant Israel * in remembrance of His mercy,
* as He spake to our fathers, * to Abraham and his seed forever.
Refrain: More honorable …
ODE IX
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy
pure birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: *
quench the raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may
unceasingly magnify Thee.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
O how the lawless and disobedient people, having plotted evil, justified the
ungodly malefactor, but condemned the Just Lord of glory to the Tree! Him we
fittingly magnify.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
We glorify Thee O Savior, the blameless Lamb who taketh away the sins of the
world, risen on the third day, and Who with the Father and the divine Spirit we
acknowledge as God, and the Lord of glory, Thee do we magnify.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Save Thy people, O Lord, whom Thou hast purchased with
Thine own precious blood, strengthening all Orthodox Christians against enemies,
and bestowing peace upon Thy Churches, O Lover of mankind, through the
supplications of the Theotokos.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Thy Cross, O Lord, hath been glorified with ineffable power; for Thy
weakness was revealed as transcending all power. Through it the powerful have
been cast down to the earth, while paupers have been raised safely to heaven.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Our froward death hath been slain, for when Thou didst appear to those in
Hades, O Christ, Thou didst grant unto them resurrection from the dead,
wherefore as the life, resurrection and hypostatic light, we magnify Thee in hymns.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
The nature that is beginningless and infinite is acknowledged in three single
divine Hypostases; as one Godhead in Father, Son and Spirit, trusting in which
the wise in God are saved.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O Virgin, fulfilling prophecy, thou didst spring from David’s root; yet in giving
birth to the Lord of glory Who hath been foretold by the Prophet David, and
Whom we fittingly magnify, thou hast also glorified him.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O most pure one, every law of praise is defeated by the majesty of thy glory;
yet, O Lady, graciously accept from us Thine unworthy suppliants, O Theotokos,
the praise we offer thee with love.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O what wonders are Thy passing all understanding! For thou, O Virgin, alone
brighter than the sun, hast granted unto all to contemplate the newest wonder of
thine incomprehensible birth-giving O all-pure one, wherefore we all magnify
thee.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
The small litany:
Then, “Holy is our God ...”: (Thrice)
Exapostilarion (Svetilen).
Note: The Exapostilarion is taken from the prescribed Eothinon according to
the Resurrection Gospel, however, If the Menaion service is ‘feasted’ the
Exapostilarion, with the appointed Theotokion, are taken from the Menaion.
On the Aposticha: “Let every breath ...”, 8 Stichera of the Resurrection,
however, if the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ sing the first 4 Stichera from
the Resurrection, and the last 4 from the Menaion, with the appointed verses.
On the Aposticha, the Resurrection Stichera, in Tone I:
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written * This glory shall be
to all His saints.
We sing the praise of Thy saving Passion, * O Christ, ** and we glorify Thy
Resurrection.
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His
power.
Having endured the Cross, * and destroyed death * and risen from the dead, *
grant peace to our lives, O Lord, ** as Thou alone art All-powerful.
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the
multitude of His greatness.
Having despoiled Hades * and raised mankind by Thy Resurrection, O Christ,
** grant that with pure hearts we may praise and glorify Thee.
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the
psaltery and harp.
As we glorify Thy divine condescension, * we praise Thee, O Christ: * For
Thou wast born of a Virgin, * yet Thou wast not separated from the Father; * as
man Thou didst suffer and willingly endure the Cross; * arising from the grave, *
as though coming forth from Thy bridal chamber, * that Thou mightest save the
world. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee!
Other Stichera by Anatolius:
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and
flute.
When Thou wast nailed to the Tree of the Cross, * then the might of the
enemy was slain; * creation shook in fear of Thee, * and Hades was despoiled by
Thy might. * Thou hast raised the dead from their tombs * and opened Paradise
unto the Thief. ** O Christ our God, glory be to Thee!
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.
Lamenting, the holy women came with haste to Thy grave; * but finding the
tomb opened and learning from the Angel * the new and marvelous wonder, *
they announced to the Apostles, ** ‘The Lord hath arisen, granting the world His
great mercy’.
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted high; * forget not
Thy paupers to the end.
We bow down before the divine stripes of Thy passion, * O Christ God, * and
the royal sacrifice that took place divinely revealed in Zion at the end of the ages;
* for Thou, the Sun of righteousness, * hast enlightened those who slept in
darkness, * leading them to the never-setting radiance, ** O Lord, glory be to
Thee!
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all
Thy wonders.
O Tumultuous race of the Jews, give ear. * Where are those who approached
Pilate? * Let the soldiers who kept watch say, * where are the seals of the grave? *
To where hath the one who was buried been moved? * Where hath the One who
is not for sale been sold? * How hath the treasure been burgled? * O Lawless
Jews, why do ye slander the Rising of the Crucified? * He hath arisen, as one free
among the dead, ** and granteth unto the world His great mercy.
Glory ..., The Eothinon of the Resurrection Gospel 
Note: If the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ the Eothinon is taken from
the Menaion, and the Eothinon of the Gospel is read at the end of Matins.
Now & Ever ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took
flesh from thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, Eve
set free, * death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in praise
we cry: ** Blessed art thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-pleased,
glory be to thee.
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion.
Today is salvation come unto the world; * let us sing praises to Him that arose
from the tomb, * and is the Author of our life. * For, having destroyed death by
death, ** He hath given us the victory and great mercy.
SUNDAY MORNING: TONE I
AT LITURGY
Typika and Beatitudes.
Through food the foe led Adam out of Paradise; but through the Cross Christ
led back the Thief as he cried: Remember me when Thou comest in Thy
kingdom.
I venerate Thy sufferings and I glorify Thy Resurrection; with Adam and with
the Thief I cry aloud with radiant voice: Remember me, O Lord, when Thou
comest in Thy Kingdom.
Thou wast crucified, O sinless one, and willingly laid in a grave, but Thou
didst arise as God; raising Adam with Thyself as he cried: Remember me when
Thou comest in Thy Kingdom.
Raising the temple of Thy body after Thy burial for three days, O Christ God,
Thou hast raised with Adam those who came from Adam as they cried:
Remember me when Thou comest in Thy Kingdom.
The Myrrh-bearers came weeping to Thy grave, O Christ God, very early in
the morning, and found an Angel sitting clothed in white, who cried: What do ye
seek? Christ hath arisen, mourn no longer.
Thy Apostles, O Lord, coming to the mountain that Thou, O Savior, hadst
appointed them, saw Thee and worshipped Thee. And Thou didst send them out
to teach the nations and baptize the inhabitants therein.
Let us all worship the Father and glorify the Son, and with them praise the
most holy Spirit, as we cry and say: O all-holy Trinity, save us all.
Theotokion: Thy people, O Christ, bring unto Thee Thy Mother to intercede
on their behalf; at her supplications, O Good One, grant us Thy compassion, that
we may glorify Thee, who dawned for us from the tomb.
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone I:
When the stone had been sealed by the Jews, * And the soldiers were guarding
Thine immaculate Body, * Thou didst arise on the third day, O Savior, * granting
life unto the world. * Wherefore, the Hosts of the Heavens cried out to Thee, O
Life-giver: * Glory to Thy Resurrection, O Christ. * Glory to Thy kingdom. **
Glory to Thy dispensation, O only Lover of mankind.
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone I:
Thou didst arise from the grave in glory as God * and thus raised up the world
with Thee; * and mortal nature singeth Thy praises as God, * and death hath
disappeared; * Adam danceth, O Master, * and now Eve, freed from her chains, *
rejoiceth as she cries aloud: ** It is Thee, O Christ, who grantest the Resurrection
to all.
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, * according
as we have hoped in Thee.
Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.
Alleluia, in Tone I: O God who givest avengement unto me, and hast
subdued peoples under me.
Verse: Who magnifieth the salvation of His king, and worketh mercy for
His anointed, for David, and for his seed unto eternity.