MONDAY EVENING: TONE I
AT VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 3 Stichera of repentance, in Tone I:
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, О Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness.
My whole life have I shamefully squandered with harlots, wretch that I am О
Lord, but like the prodigal I cry out with compunction: О heavenly Father, I have
sinned! Cleanse Thou and save me, and reject me not who have withdrawn far
from Thee, and am now beggared because of my fruitless deeds.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
O Christ Who art rich, in impoverishing Thyself Thou hast enriched mankind
with immortality and radiance. Wherefore, with the virtues enrich me who have
been impoverished by the pleasures of life, and number me with the pauper
Lazarus, rescuing me from the torment of the rich man and Gehenna, which lie
before me.
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
I have sorely enriched myself with evil, I have loved food, and preferred the
good things of this life, and am condemned to Gehenna, О Lord. My starving
mind have I disdained, as the rich man did Lazarus. Have pity on me, who have
been cast away from the doors of Thy divine works, О Lord.
Then the Stichera of the saint, from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these
Stichera of the Forerunner, in the same melody:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
О wondrous Prophet, Baptist and Forerunner of Christ, by thy prayers cause
thou my heart, which hath been desiccated by unseemly deeds, to pour forth
rivers of ever-flowing tears, I beseech thee, that, saved, I who am greatly ailing
may magnify Him Who hath glorified thee.
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
О blessed prophet who baptized Christ, the Abyss Who taketh away the
transgressions of the world, in thee is all my hope, and on thee do set mine
expectation of life. Him do thou entreat, I pray thee, О John, that He cleanse my
heart and save me.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
О divine Forerunner, wise preacher of grace, who proclaimed repentance
beforehand to all nations, be thou well-pleased to grant my most accursed and
blind soul to abide in repentance and always do the will of the Lord, that I may
glorify thee with faith and love.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
О Virgin, entreat the Lamb Whom the all-great Forerunner proclaimed unto
all, and Who taketh away the sins of the whole world, and pray that I, who am
unworthy, may escape the lot of the goats on the day of judgment, and may be
reckoned among the sheep on His right hand.
Then, “О Joyous Light ...”, the Prokeimenon in Tone IV:
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him.
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou didst
hearken unto me.
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of repentance, in Tone I:
Great is the abyss of my many transgressions, О Savior, and I am grievously
engulfed because of mine offenses. Grant me Thy hand, as Thou didst to Peter, О
God. Save me, and have mercy upon me!
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in
heaven. Be­hold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress,
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us.
In that I have been condemned for wicked thoughts and deeds, О Savior,
grant me the thought of returning to Thee, О God, that I may cry aloud: Save me,
О good Benefactor, and have mercy upon me!
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.
To the Martyrs: The confession ye made before the tribunal reviled the power
of the demons, and freed mankind from delusion, О saints. Wherefore, when ye
were beheaded ye cried aloud: О Lord, may the sacrifice of our lives be wellpleasing to Thee, for having loved Thee, we have spurned this transitory life, О
Lover of mankind.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
O all-hymned Virgin, * in whom Moses beheld a mystery with prophetic eyes *
the bush that burned yet remained unconsumed; * for the fire of the Godhead did
not burn thy womb, O pure one. * Wherefore, we beseech thee, as the Mother of
our God: ** beg thou peace and great mercy for the world
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion through Our
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal.
MONDAY NIGHT: TONE I
AT COMPLINE
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos.
ODE I
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He
hath been glorified.
Rejoice, О most pure sanctuary, О Virgin, adornment of the angels and
receptacle of the Spirit, О immaculate Bride of the beginningless Father and
Mother of God the Word!
Thou art a Queen, in that thou art the daughter of the King, О Lady
Theotokos, having produced and given birth to God the King in the flesh; and
thou reignest with Him.
Glory ..., David the psalmist hymneth thy nativity, and Isaiah singeth
surpassingly of thy most pure womb, О all-pure Mary. And the Christian people
glorify thy birthgiving.
Now & ever ..., The Church proclaimeth thy birthgiving with Orthodox
doctrines and divine hymnody, О Virgin Bride of God, for it venerateth the signs
of the incarnation of thy Son.
ODE III
Irmos: The stone which the builders have rejected, * the same hath become
the cornerstone: * this is the rock upon which Christ hath established the
Church, * which He hath redeemed from among the nations.
As thou hast the glory of virginity, thou hast been invested with the grace of
the Holy Spirit, О most pure Mary, who hast been shown to be the Theotokos. О
new and hidden mystery! For how dost thou remain a virgin, having given birth to
God in the flesh?
Who can recount what Thou hast done, О Lord? For Thou hast shown
Thyself to be the Son of one who should have been cursed to give birth to
children amid grief. Yea, the fallen nature of women rejoiceth in Thee our God,
because of the Theotokos.
Glory ..., Through thee, О most pure Mary, who alone art the Theotokos, hath
the world been freed from the tempest of transgressions. Wherefore, having thee
as a haven of salvation, we the faithful praise thy mighty works with hymnody.
Now & ever ..., The prophets of old hymned thy virginity, saying that thou
wouldst give birth within time to the Timeless One, to the Word Who is beyond
words, Christ our God, One of the Trinity. Him doth the Church honor with
images, О pure Mary.
ODE IV
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of
the Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh,
Thou shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown
forth! * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!
In many ways the mirror of the divine prophets, sevenfold in radiance,
hymneth thy prefigurations; and we, receiving the signs of thy departure in deed,
believe thee to be the true Theotokos, beholding thee in matter.
Honoring thee as the true Mother of God as is meet, О pure Virgin, we offer
our own cry to thee, who wast proclaimed in the law and the prophets: Rejoice, О
joyous one! The Lord is with thee!
Glory ..., Behold! the Theotokos, the divine mountain, which Habbakuk saw
manifestly overshadowed with the virtues, hath shone forth in the world. And
through her we who of old fell away through disobedience have straightway
drawn nigh again to God.
Now & ever ..., Blessed is the tongue which hath been deemed worthy to
honor thy birthgiving with Orthodox faith and doctrine and works, О most pure
and pure one, truly showing forth all the images of the incarnation of thy Son.
ODE V
Irmos: Seeking Thee early in the morn, * we sing Thy praises, O Christ
God, * who for our sake became poor * and in Thy flesh * endured the
Cross and death.
In a secret and hidden manner Moses revealed thee as the bush which burned
without being consumed, О Lady Theotokos; for thy material womb was not
consumed by the Godhead.
Hymning thee as the Mother of the Word of God, О pure Theotokos, we
offer a flourishing gift of words to thee, in whom we believe and rejoice.
Glory ..., Turn not away from the praise of our defiled lips, О most pure
Theotokos; for there is no one on earth who dare hymn thee as is meet.
Now & ever ..., He Who was born from the Virgin is One Being in two
natures: Invisible God and visible Man, Who for our sake assumed the likeness of
men.
ODE VI
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the
world, Glory be to Thee!
The seven-branched candlestand of the prophets perceived thee to be the
noetic lamp-stand, О Virgin, manifestly showing forth the activity of the Spirit
Who shineth forth within thee.
О Virgin, thou wast, truly shown to be the tree of Life which hath slain the
deceiving serpent with thy fruit, having given birth to Christ God, our Life.
Glory ..., Beauteous praises should not be offered to thee from defiled lips, О
pure Mother of our God; rather, behold thou the desire of my soul, and accept it.
Now & ever ..., The iniquitous rage in tumult of bitter unbelief when they
behold the assemblies of the Orthodox venerating thine image, О Virgin.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone I:
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, О Savior ...”:
Guide thou my wretched life, О pure one, and take pity on my soul, which
hath stumbled into the abyss of perdition through many transgressions, О allimmaculate one; and at the hour of my death free me from the accusing demons
and from the terrible sentence.
ODE VII
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither
touched nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a
single mouth * Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * 'O God of our
fathers, Blessed art Thou.'
Thou hast been revealed to be all-adorned with the virtues, with glory and the
honor of virginity, О Bride of God; for thy comeliness is truly most beautiful in
magnificence, and the Lord Who loveth thee hath brought Thee, His divine
Mother, to Himself.
Thou hast manifestly become a staff of uprightness, a most precious staff of
royalty; wherefore, thou didst bring forth as fruit, the Word of God, which the
miracle of Aaron’s rod clearly prefigured of old.
Glory ..., Having defiled my body, mind and soul with many carnal passions,
О pure one, how can I hymn the beauty of thy virtues? I am at a loss and am
afraid. Yet be thou thyself my helper through thy supplications.
Now & ever ..., I honor the union of Thine incarnation, О Christ, and I
reverently venerate the image thereof, for, though Thou art the pre-eternal God,
yet didst Thou become an immutable man, being perfect in both natures.
ODE VIII
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages.
Let the divine sanctity of God be hymned, whereby the world hath been
delivered from corruption! Let all who have fallen then rise up, for Mary hath
given birth to Christ, our salvation!
We hymn thee, О most pure Mother of God. Who will not glorify thee, who
art truly good, the hope of our souls? Wherefore, О most holy one, accept thou
our cries.
Glory ..., Adorn yourselves today with hymns, О ye faithful! Ye angels and
men, give glory together; for the devil and despair are fallen! Mary hath for us
given birth to our hope of salvation!
Now & ever ..., О ye who are blind, describe not the Godhead, and tell no
falsehoods! For He is simply invisible and un-seeable. Yet, depicting the image of
the flesh, I venerate it, and with faith I glorify the Virgin who gave birth to the
Lord.
ODE IX
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of
all descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom
He was incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as
the pure Mother of God.
Rejoice, О Mary, thou great wonder of all creation! Rejoice, О daughter of
David and Mother of the Lord! Rejoice, subject of Gabriel’s hymnody! Rejoice, О
pure one, thou refuge, confirmation and help of all sinners on earth!
The wondrous Joachim and the godly Anna, beholding on earth Mary, the
Mother of the Creator, to whom they gave birth as a daughter, hymn her through
the divine Spirit and chant songs of thanksgiving. By her supplications save us all,
in that Thou art God.
Glory ..., О most holy Virgin Mother of God Most High, thy birthgiving on
earth hath been shown to be the salvation of sinners and the lowly; for in thee
have we been saved who have faith. Yet save me also, now and throughout all the
living ages.
Now & ever ..., I know the Word to be incarnate, yet immutable. Wherefore, I
hymn Thee with faith, Who art in two natures but one hypostasis. And
proclaiming Thee to be truly God and man, I end my hymnody.
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration.
Trisagion, and the rest, as usual. Dismissal.
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE I
AT MATINS
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone I:
I, the prodigal, conceived in iniquities, dare not gaze upon the heights of
heaven; but risking offense to Thy love for mankind, I cry: Cleanse me, О God,
and save me!
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy
wrath.
If the righteous man is barely saved, where shall I, a sinner, find myself, for I
have not borne the burden and heat of the day. Yet number me among the hired
workers of the eleventh hour, and save me.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Having been begotten in heaven without mother, on earth Thou wast born
without father in a manner past understanding and all telling. Him do thou
beseech, О Theotokos, that our souls may be saved.
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone I:
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, О Savior ...”:
Hasten Thou to open unto me Thy fatherly embrace, though I have wasted
my life in prodigality. Disdain not now mine impoverished heart, О Savior Who
hast before Thine eyes the inexhaustible riches of Thy compassions. For unto
Thee, О Lord, do I cry out in compunction: О Father, I have sinned against
heaven and before Thee!
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy
wrath.
Seeing the wealth of the virtues of Job, the enemy of the righteous plotted to
ruin and rob him of them; but though the enemy broke the tower of his body, he
could not steal the treasure of his spirit, for he found the soul of the blameless
one to be fortified. Yet he hath stripped me naked and exiled me. Wherefore,
going before me before the end, О Savior, deliver me from the deceiver, and save
me.
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.
To the Martyrs: As valiant warriors, believing with oneness of mind, ye were
undaunted by the threats of the tyrants, О holy ones. Ye came eagerly to Christ,
taking up the precious Cross; and having finished the race ye received victory
from heaven. Glory be to Him Who strengthened you! Glory be to Him Who
crowned you! Glory be to Him Who through you worketh healings for all!
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Thou didst anticipate the despair of the Ninevites, setting aside the
punishment decreed for them, О Lord, and Thy mercy overcame Thy wrath.
Have pity now upon Thy people and flock; cast down our enemies with Thy
mighty hand, and through the prayers of the Theotokos grant us Thy mercy.
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone I:
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, О Savior ...”:
In my thoughts I have fallen among thieves and been robbed in mind. I have
wounded my soul with sins, and lie bruised, О greatly merciful Jesus. Yet through
the supplications of the Forerunner pour forth Thy mercy, and heal the grievous
wounds of my soul.
Glory ..., О John who of old baptized the Cleansing of the whole world in the
streams of the Jordan, raise me up who have been brought low by many
transgressions, and wash away all my defilement, as a right acceptable mediator
ever entreating Him Who is the Lover of mankind.
Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
O pure Virgin Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, thou sole intercessor and
protection of the faithful: from tribulations, sorrows and cruel circumstances
deliver all who place their trust in thee, O Maiden, and save our souls by thy
divine supplications.
ODE I
Canon of repentance, the acrostic whereof is “Accept the supplication of
my words, О Christ” the composition of Joseph, in Tone I:
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He
hath been glorified.
Enslaved by the passions of sin, I fall down before Thee, О Lord, that Thou
mightest show me to be free of them, for I ardently glorify Thy goodness.
Wretch that I am, I have been wounded by the spear of sin and am done to
death. And the enemy, seeing me lying there, is gladdened. О Thou Who dost
raise up the dead, give me life and save me.
To the Martyrs: The choirs of the passion-bearers rendered glory, with their
members glorifying Christ Who bore our flesh and brought an end to corruption
by His sufferings.
To the Martyrs: The glorious martyrs, the towers and ramparts of piety,
remained unshaken by the assaults of the enemy. By their prayers, О God, have
pity on us all.
Theotokion: Like a fiery throne thou bearest the Creator, О Virgin, and like an
animate bridal-chamber and beauteous palace thou containest the King Who
became like us, though without change or confusion.
Another canon, of the great & holy prophet John the Forerunner, the
acrostic whereof is “Thou hearest the voice of those who cry out to thee,
О blessed one”, in Tone I:
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn ...,
Thou wast the voice of the Word, О blessed one; wherefore, accept the cries
we make unto thee, О Forerunner, freeing us from evils by thy mediation.
Shining forth like the dawn, like the sun, thou enlightenest the ends of the
earth, casting the evil spirits into darkness; wherefore, dispel gloom from our
souls.
О Forerunner, unto mortals thou didst preach that our Life is come;
wherefore, slay thou the passions which do me to death, О blessed one, and show
me forth as one who shareth in the effulgence of God.
Theotokion: О most pure Lady, who within time hast given birth to the only
timeless Son incarnate, heal mine all-accursed soul of the passions which ever
afflict me.
ODE III
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: The stone which the builders have rejected, * the same hath become
the cornerstone: * this is the rock upon which Christ hath established the
Church, * which He hath redeemed from among the nations.
Behold my weakness, О greatly merciful Christ Who clothed Thyself therein!
Behold the exceeding ugliness of my soul! Hearken to my voice, О Savior, and
transform its lack of beauty into comeliness.
О Jesus Who saved the prodigal, save me who alone have transgressed Thy
laws of salvation, though I have mindlessly committed every sin, and estranged
myself from Thee by thoughts which make me alien to Thee, О Good One.
To the Martyrs: The ranks of the incorporeal ones truly marveled at your
courage, О saints: how, suffering most gloriously before the tribunal, and falling in
body, ye cast down all the incorporeal foes by divine power.
To the Martyrs: Still stained with the blood of your wounds, still soaked with
drops of your blood, О passion-bearers, crowned as victors ye stood, rejoicing,
before the Lord, the immortal King.
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth unto Him Whom the Father begat before
all ages. And without having known a man thou didst feed the Nourisher. Behold
an all-wondrous miracle, a new mystery, О thou who art full of the grace of God!
For this cause the soul of each of the faithful doth glorify thee.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: The stone which the builders have rejected ...,
О Forerunner who sprang forth in a sacred manner from a barren and
childless woman, thou wast revealed to be fruitful in divine deeds; wherefore, my
heart, which is in all ways unfruitful, do thou render fruitful in good works, that I
may ever faithfully glorify thee.
With the bread of heaven, О blessed one, fortify my heart which is paralyzed
by wicked thoughts; and grant that I may earnestly do the will of the allcompassionate God, that I may ever glorify thee with faith.
Thou didst preach the Lamb Who taketh away the sins of the world, О
blessed prophet. Ease thou the heavy burden of my sins, I pray, granting me
compunction, which washeth away the defilements of the passions.
Theotokion: The Word Who issued forth bearing flesh from thee, О
Theotokos, clothed Himself wholly in Adam. Him do thou entreat, О Theotokos,
that He deliver us from all temptations and from everlasting fire.
ODE IV
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of
the Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh,
Thou shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown
forth! * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!
The riches Thou gavest me have I squandered, О Christ, wickedly committing
unseemly deeds; and being naked, I clothed myself in works of ungodliness.
Wherefore, I cry to Thee: Taking pity on me in Thy divine goodness, clothe me
again in my primal vesture.
I have been brought low by mindlessness, have fallen grievously, and lie on the
ground, incurably sick. Raise me up, О Christ, Thou restoration of the fallen, and
establish my heart on the rock of saving repentance.
To the Martyrs: Emulating Christ Who was lifted up upon the Cross, and
accepting wounds, the passion-bearers rejoiced together, and with the showers of
their blood caused the showers of polytheism to cease, pouring forth streams of
healing.
To the Martyrs: Navigating with the hope of salvation as your rudder, О
divine spiritual athletes, ye traversed the violence of tortures and waves of
bitterness dryshod, and hastened to the harbor on high, full of all gladness.
Theotokion: Beholding thee, the angelic armies were amazed at how He
Whose visage is invisible through thee took on visible form like unto ours, О
Virgin Birthgiver of God. Him do thou beseech, that He grant salvation unto all
who glorify thee with faith.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk ...,
Having woven a garment of salvation for thyself in the nakedness of thy body,
О thou who didst baptize the Lord, with the vesture of righteousness and
gladness do thou clothe me, who am stripped bare of all good works, I pray thee.
Let a drop of salvation fall upon me who am withering away through the
burning of the passions, О Forerunner, who submerged in the streams of the
Jordan Jesus the Bestower of life, the Torrent of sweetness, that I may glorify thee
as is meet.
It is neither an angel nor a mediator who hath saved us, but the Lord Himself,
Who came to earth, and for Whom thou didst make the ways straight, О blessed
one. Him do thou now entreat, that He show me the path which leadeth to the
kingdom.
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be a sanctified temple of God, Who
dwelt within thee in a manner past understanding, О Virgin. Him do thou
beseech, that He cleanse us of the defilements of sin, that we may be shown to be
temples and habitations of the divine Spirit.
ODE V
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, * for we know no other God
than Thee, * and we call upon Thy Name, * for Thou art the God of the
living and the dead.
I am satiated with many and grievous falls into sin, О compassionate and longsuffering Master. Have pity on me who have condemned myself, and turn not Thy
face away from me.
Thou didst justify the publican who sighed, О Christ. And I, emulating him,
beat my breast and cry out to Thee: Cleanse me, О Thou Who alone art
compassionate and full of tender compassion!
To the Martyrs: Thy saints, О Lord, have been shown to be steadfast
luminaries who dispel the deep night of delusion and enlighten the whole world
with wondrous radiance.
To the Martyrs: Cherishing Thee, the Rock of life, like an all-precious stone,
the martyrs, whirled about amid tortures, brought down the whole edifice of
delusion.
Theotokion: О all-immaculate one, thou hast given birth to One of the most
holy Trinity in two wills but bearing a single hypostasis. Him do thou earnestly
beseech, that we all may be saved.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God ...,
Thou didst make thine abode in the desert like Elijah of old, О Forerunner of
Christ; wherefore, with divine care make steadfast my heart, which hath been laid
waste by transgressions, О all-blessed one.
As thou wast an immovable tower and rampart of the faithful, О great
forerunner of Christ, show forth my thoughts to be unshaken by the wiles of the
deceiver.
With thy voice thou didst announce to the dead the glad tidings of the Light,
Who from Light shone forth on the earth, О blessed one, and we who were in
darkness were enlightened. Wherefore, enlighten me who am sorely darkened.
Theotokion: О Virgin, David proclaimeth thee to be the pure Queen and
Virgin; wherefore, I implore thee: Make me an heir to the kingdom of heaven,
that I may call thee blessed.
ODE VI
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the
world, Glory be to Thee!
The bones of mine accursed soul have been broken, and I have been crushed
beneath the weight of many pleasures. But help me, О Christ, Thou only help of
all.
I have fallen into the deep of evils and the tempest of the passions, but I cry to
Thee, О almighty Christ: Lead me up with Thy mighty hand, and save me!
To the Martyrs: With tens of thousands of the elect the multitude of the holy
passion-bearers trampled underfoot the myriads of the noetic foe, uniting
themselves to the myriads of the noetic intelligences.
To the Martyrs: Having caused the depths of ungodliness to dry up, О
spiritual athletes, ye have inherited a torrent of delight; wherefore, dry up the odor
of my sin.
Theotokion: О Mary, revealed tabernacle of sanctification, sanctify my
wretched soul which alone hath been defiled by pleasures, and cause me to share
in glory divine.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud ...,
О Baptist who preached repentance on the earth, show me the paths of
repentance which lead to the light, and deliver me out of the chasm of falsehood.
О thou who immersed the Abyss of mercy in the streams of the river, dry up
the abyss of my passions, giving me a wellspring of tears, О Forerunner and
Herald of Christ.
O Forerunner of the Lord, save me from sickness of spirit, the passions of the
flesh, the perils of life, and all temptations and tribulations.
Theotokion: I earnestly entreat thee, the Mother of God who art good among
women: Disdain me not, О pure one, but have pity and keep me untouched by
any harm.
ODE VII
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither
touched nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a
single mouth * Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * 'O God of our
fathers, Blessed art Thou.'
Job mastered patience, and as a tower of courage remained unshaken by all the
attacks of the wicked one. Him do thou emulate, О my soul, and in nowise be
disheartened amid evils.
I have been overcome by the pleasures of the body, and though a rational
being, have become irrational. О Word of God Who saved the harlot by Thy
word, save me, the wretched one, that I may sing, blessing Thy goodness.
To the Martyrs: Delivered by the blood of Him Who suffered in the flesh for
our sake, О wise martyrs, it was your good will to ardently shed your blood for
Him. Wherefore, ye reign unceasingly with Him.
To the Martyrs: By the upbuilding of your sacred sufferings, О wise ones, ye
showed yourselves to be a palace wherein Christ, the only King and Lord, joyfully
rested, Who led you all into the mansions of heaven.
Theotokion: О all-hymned one, Christ desired thee alone out of all
generations, as one pure and honorable, to be His habitation; and shining forth
from thee like the sun, He hath enlightened all the earth.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace ...,
As thou wast the preeminent and glorious mediator between the old and the
new covenants, О Baptist, intercede for me, entreating Jesus, the Renewer of all
things, that He restore me who have wholly grown old through sins.
О Baptist and Forerunner of Christ, thou didst appear on earth laying down
the law of repentance. By thy supplications do thou strengthen all to keep this law,
that we may be delivered from the countless evils we ever commit.
Pursuing all mastery, О wise one, thou didst tread the narrow path, being
wholly illumined by the breadth of splendid divine visions. And beseeching Christ,
grant that we also may de­light therein.
Triadicon: О ye faithful, let us straightway glorify the Trinity, the one Essence:
The beginningless Father, the Son and the Spirit: the one reigning Being, the one
Dominion, the one Cause, the Life which createth life for us.
Theotokion: Bring thou entreaty unto God, О most pure one, that He
overlook our transgressions and boundless sins and free us from the everlasting
tormenting fire.
ODE VIII
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages.
By his wicked counsel the lying serpent hath stripped me bare of all the
virtues. О my Savior Who hath stripped away his evil, array me now in the robe of
the virtues.
O righteous Judge Who shalt come to judge the race of mankind at the dread
hour, send me not condemned into the fire of Gehenna, but have pity and save
me.
To the Martyrs: Neither tribulation, nor misfortune, nor the sword, nor fire
were able to separate you from the love of Christ, О all-praised spiritual athletes
of the Lord, because of the loving-kindness of Him Who loved you.
To the Martyrs: Wrestling in the flesh against the bodiless foe, ye cast him
down, О valiant spiritual athletes; and ye now join chorus with the incorporeal
beings, curing the passions of our souls and bodies.
Theotokion: The Husbandman of all, finding thee to be like a flower in the
vales of life, made His abode within thee, О Birthgiver of God; and He now
perfumeth us with the sweet scents of the virtues and purity.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: Him of whom the angels ...,
I alone have sinned more than others born on earth; I alone have been a
breaker of Thy laws, О Lord. Wherefore, for the sake of the Forerunner have pity
and save me.
An angel in a manner of life wast thou revealed to be, О John the Baptist, who
preached the Angel of great Counsel to the ends of the earth; wherefore, with
hymns we glorify thee throughout all ages.
Thou wast unjustly beheaded, О blessed one who immersed the head of
Christ in the waters. By thy supplications strengthen all of us, that we may truly
crush the pernicious head of the deceiver underfoot.
Theotokion: Deliver me from unseemly sins, fiery retribution, tormenting
darkness, the gnashing of teeth, and the worm, О Virgin, thou only intercessor for
the race of mankind.
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...”, and make prostrations.
ODE IX
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of
all descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom
He was incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as
the pure Mother of God.
Now is the time for repentance and works of purity! This is the day for us to
do the works of light! Flee the darkness of the passions, and cast off the sleep of
evil despondency, О my soul, that thou mayest share in the divine light.
I sigh like the publican, and I shed tears like the harlot; like the thief I cry out
to Thee: Remember me, О Compassionate One; and like the prodigal son I
exclaim: I have sinned! And I fall down before Thee as did the Canaanite woman.
О merciful Christ, disdain me not!
To the Martyrs: Having patiently surrendered bodies over to wounds and a
violent death, ye have truly been shown to be physicians who heal the passions of
men’s body and the broken state of their souls, О all-praised spiritual athletes of
the Lord; wherefore, ye are ever called blessed.
To the Martyrs: The patience of the most wise passion-bearers of Christ hath
shone forth far more brightly than the radiance of the sun; wherefore, by grace it
hath manifestly felled the prince of darkness, destroyed the might of ungodliness,
and illumined the hearts of the faithful.
Theotokion: With the enlightening splendors of the Word Who shone forth
from thy holy womb illumining the ends of the earth, O Virgin Theotokos,
enlighten my soul, which hath been darkened by the blackness of pleasures and
the apathy of the passions, that I may hymn thee with faith.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom ...,
Behold, the beacon shining forth upon those in the darkness of life! Behold,
the melodiously singing swallow, the harbinger of spring for all, the great
Forerunner of Christ, the mediator between the old and the new! By his prayers
may we ever be preserved.
I, who have a multitude of sins, now send thee, the friend of the Bridegroom,
unto Him as an advocate, and I cry out to thee, О thou who didst baptize Him:
Grant that my debts may be repaid, О most blessed one, and light thou the lamp
of my soul, which through my carelessness hath utterly gone out.
With the incorporeal angels, with the honored apostles, with the sacred
passion-bearers, and with the prophets, О Forerunner, ever entreat the supremely
good God, that we who are ever enriched by thee, our good intercessor, may
receive everlasting good things.
О beauteous swallow, precious nightingale, supremely good dove, turtledove
who lovest the wilderness, offspring of the desert, who didst baptize the Lord:
Show forth my soul, which hath become barren through unfruitfulness, to bear
good deeds as fruit.
Theotokion: Like the throne of the cherubim thou holdest Him Who upholds
all things, and thou feedest Him Who feeds us. Him do thou unceasingly entreat,
О divinely joyous and pure one, that thy flock may ever be delivered from
earthquake, calamity, exile and every need.
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...” and a prostration.
Litany: Let us complete ..., Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms.
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of repentance, in Tone I:
The next world awaiteth thee, О soul, and the Judge will rebuke thy hidden
and evil deeds. Wherefore, tarry not amid the things that are here, but go forth
beforetime, crying out to the Judge: Cleanse me, О God, and save me!
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons.
Overlook me not, who am beset by sinful sloth, О my Savior, but lift my mind
up to repentance, and show me to be a skillful laborer in Thy vineyard. Grant me
the reward of the eleventh hour, and great mercy.
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our
hands do Thou guide aright.
To the Martyrs: The warriors of the great King opposed the edicts of the
tyrants, and bravely paying no heed to tortures, trampled underfoot all delusion,
and have been crowned as is meet. And they ask of the Savior peace and great
mercy for our souls.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
I have surpassed The harlot, the prodigal, and the thief, * and in transgressions
I have excelled the publican and the Ninevites. * Woe is me! What shall I do? *
How shall I escape torment, wretch that I am? * O pure one, I fall down before
thee: * have compassion upon me according to thy mercy, ** as thy Son hath
saved others!
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia.
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal.
TUESDAY MORNING: TONE I
AT LITURGY
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone I:
By food the enemy led Adam oat of paradise, but by the Cross Christ led back
into it the thief who cried out: Remember me, О Lord, when Thou comest in Thy
kingdom!
О God, turn me around, who every day commit sin and break Thy
commandments, and rescue me from torment, that I may glorify Thine ineffable
loving-kindness, О Lover of mankind.
Thou wast shown to be the torch of God, О Forerunner, going before the
never-waning Light, Who ineffably shone forth upon us from the cloud of light.
Wherefore, ever entreat Him, that He have pity and save our souls.
To the Martyrs: Having endured subtle tortures, О all-praised martyrs, ye were
deemed worthy of the good things of heaven above; wherefore, ye are ever called
blessed by all.
Glory ..., We all know the one Godhead in three Hypostases: the Father, the
Son and the Spirit of life, to be indivisible, remaining always and forever
beginningless and uncommingled.
Now & ever ..., О pure one, in giving birth to God in the flesh thou wast
preserved ever-virgin even after giving birth, as thou wast before birthgiving. Him
do thou entreat, that He deliver us from the passions of the soul, we pray.
On Tuesday, the Prokeimenon in Tone VII:
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord *
and shall hope in Him.
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and
like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our
God they shall blossom forth.
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he
shall not be afraid of evil tidings. 