THURSDAY EVENING: TONE I
AT VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 3 Stichera of the Cross, in Tone I:
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised, martyrs ...”:
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness.
Thou didst stretch forth Thy most pure hands upon the Cross, О Christ,
summoning those who had departed far from Thee and settling them near
Thyself; wherefore, I pray to Thee: Unite me to Thee, though I have been made
captive by the passions, and grant unto me the repentance which washeth away all
the defilement of the passions.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
Thou didst uplift Thy most pure hands upon the Tree, О Christ, and didst
bloody Thy fingers, desiring to deliver Adam, the work of Thy divine hands, who
because of disobedience was held fast in the realm of death, О Lover of mankind;
and Thou didst raise him up by Thine authority, О Almighty.
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
Thou didst endure suffering for our sake, О Savior Who art immutable by
nature and dispassionate in Thy divinity; and Thou wast crucified with thieves, О
sinless and beginningless Christ. The sun, unable to bear the audacity, dimmed its
rays, and the whole earth quaked, acknowledging Thee to be the Creator of the
world.
Then the Stichera of the saint, from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these
Stichera of the Cross & the Theotokos, in the same melody:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
Once, beholding on the Tree Him to Whom she had given birth from her
seedless womb, the immaculate Virgin, unable to bear the wounding of her womb,
said, tearing her hair: “O Thou Who holdest all creation in Thy hand, how hast
Thou been lifted up upon the Cross as one condemned, desiring to save mankind
in every way?”
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
Once, beholding on the Tree Him to Whom she had given birth from her
seedless womb, the immaculate Virgin, unable to bear the wound­ing of her
womb, said, tearing her hair: “O Thou Who holdest all creation in Thy hand, how
hast Thou been lifted up upon the Cross as one condemned, desiring to save man
in every way?”
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
“O ineffable Son of the beginningless Father,” said the most pure one, “When
I behold my Child upon the Cross, how can I not understand for what deeds the
ungrateful people have thus rewarded Thee? Yet as Thou dost desire to save Thy
creation, Thou dost endure all with long-suffering, О Compassionate One.“
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Stavrotheotokion:
“Lifted up upon the Tree, О my most sweet Child, and having tasted gall and
vinegar, Thou didst sweeten the bitter taste of Adam of old; wherefore, as the
righteous Judge, О Master Who arose as Almighty, sweeten me with Thy healing
Passion,” said the Virgin, weeping.
Then, “О Joyous Light ...”, the Prokeimenon in Tone VI:
Prokeimenon: My help cometh from the Lord, * Who hath made heaven
and the earth.
Verse: I have lifted up mine eyes to the Mountains, from whence cometh
my help.
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Cross, in Tone I:
The Cross was set up on Golgotha, and blossomed forth immortality for us
from the ever-flowing fountain of the Savior’s side.
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest. in
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress,
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us.
The precious Cross of the Savior is for us an indestructible rampart; for,
placing our trust in it, we all are saved.
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.
To the Martyrs: By the supplications of all the saints and the Theotokos, О
Lord, grant us peace, and have mercy upon us, in that Thou alone art
compassionate.
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thine unjust slaying, O Christ, * the Virgin,
cried out to Thee, weeping: * “O my sweetest Child! * How is it that Thou diest
unjustly? * How is it that Thou Who hast suspended the whole earth upon the
waters * dost hang upon the Tree? * Leave me not alone * who am Thy Mother 
and handmaiden, ** I pray, O greatly merciful Benefactor!”
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion through Our
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal.
THURSDAY NIGHT: TONE I
AT COMPLINE
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos
ODE I
Irmos: Having been delivered from bitter slavery, * Israel traversed the
impassable as though dry land; * and beholding the enemy drowned, * they
chanted unto God as to their Redeemer, * Who worketh wonders with His
upraised arm, * for He hath been glorified.
I am held fast in despondency as I consider the multitude of my transgressions
and the answer I must make to the Judge, О Lady Theotokos. Yet be thou for me
a divine mediator, placating Him by thy loving-kindness.
О most pure one, thou refuge of Christians, setting aright of the fallen and
cleansing offenses; at the hour of the dread judgment deliver me from the everburning fire, granting me life everlasting.
Glory ..., Thee, О Virgin, have we all, the faithful, acquired as our only sure
helper; for thou hast given birth unto God. Wherefore, all of us, all the
generations of the earth, bless thee, as thou didst foretell, О pure one.
Now & ever ..., Beholding thy Creator and Son upon the Cross, О pure and
all-immaculate one, thou wast filled with awe and didst say: “What is this, О my
Child? How have the wicked repaid Thee with evil for the good which Thou didst
show them?”
ODE III
Irmos: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before
all ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin,
* to Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy
art Thou, O Lord.
All the prophets proclaimed thee the Mother of God in most glorious images;
and we, clearly beholding their fulfillment, also believe, and ask that through thee
we may receive divine serenity.
О Sovereign Lady of the world, salvation and help of the faithful; accepting
the signs which issue forth from the depths of my heart and the streams of my
tears, deliver me who am bound by many transgressions, and save me, О pure
one.
Glory ..., Possessed of boldness before Christ God, in that thou art His
Mother, О pure one, pray thou ever that we be delivered from the children of
Hagar and from all harm, and make us steadfast, that we may glorify Him with
thanksgiving, О most immaculate one.
Now & ever ..., Beholding her Son lifted up upon the Cross, the most pure
one exclaimed, and, crying out, gave utterance from the depths of her heart:
“What have the wicked and iniquitous ones, who were filled to repletion with Thy
gifts, done to Thee, О my Son?”
ODE IV
Irmos: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem,
* O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that
knew not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to
Thy power, O Lord.
Cast down the savagery of the wicked foe and the machinations they direct
against me, and invest me with thy might, О all-immaculate one, ever preserving
me unharmed, whole and unvanquished, who radiantly hymn thee.
Vanquished by the law of the flesh, full of the passions, I do unseemly and
iniquitous things. And I dare not in anywise lift up mine eyes to thee, О pure
Lady. But do thou save me, wretch that I am, by the law of thy tender
compassions. Do thou save me!
Glory ..., О Lady, we the faithful have thee and God alone as our hope
unashamed and our help. By thy supplications deliver us from all enemies, visible
and invisible, from harm and temptations, that we may unceasingly glorify thee.
Now & ever ..., Beholding the Son to Whom thou hast given birth without
seed nailed to the Cross, О all-immaculate one, thou didst cry out maternally and,
lamenting, didst say: “What is this new, most glorious and incomprehensible
wonder which I behold in Thee, О my Son?”
ODE V
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou
hast sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. *
Wherefore guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and
watching by night we glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind.
As thy supplication is tireless and thy helping of thy servants fervent, О Virgin,
rescue and save us, anticipating our needs amid all the perilous misfortunes of life,
that we not fall victim to grief and become corrupt.
О Mary, dwelling-place of God, show me forth through repentance to be a
habitation for God, for I have become the haunt of wicked demons through my
vile deeds, mindlessly carrying out their will.
Glory ..., As thou art the compassionate Mother of God, heal us, who are
cruelly afflicted in body and soul with sinful passions; for thou truly hast given
birth to Christ, the Physician of souls and bodies, the abundant Wellspring of life.
Now & ever ..., Beholding her Son upon the tree of the Cross, the most
immaculate one was stricken with pain in her womb, and with tears she cried out:
I am in awe to see Thy long-suffering, О my Son, beholding this new wonder!
How is it that Thou, Who art sinless, dost endure an unjust death?”
ODE VI
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a
babe from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and
taken flesh, * came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being
Himself not subject to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all
harm.
Thou wast the receptacle of the noetic Myrrh Who hath perfumed the whole
earth with the sweet fragrance of His divinity, О most holy Bride of God.
Wherefore, with the fragrance of thy supplication dispel all the stench of my
transgressions from my soul.
The fire of pleasures doth utterly consume me, afflicting my lowly heart, and
iniquitously moving me to commit unseemly deeds. Hasten thou to extinguish it,
in that thou hast given birth to the divine Fire, my salvation, О Bride of God.
Glory ..., Deliver us from the temptations of enemies visible and invisible, О
all-hymned Virgin, and preserve those who with Orthodox Faith truly confess
thee to be the Theotokos, О Mother of God; for thou dost ever possess might, in
that thou hast given birth to Him Who hath created all things.
Now & ever ..., Standing before the Cross and beholding her Son hanging
thereon in the flesh, the most immaculate one felt her womb burn with grief, and,
shedding tears, she cried: “O my Child, truly ineffable is Thy compassion for all
men!”
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone I:
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, О Savior ...”:
Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the Tree, * the
unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: * “How
is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings * which surpass all
telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?” 
ODE VII
Irmos: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children
brought up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but
standing in the midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers,
blessed art Thou.
I cannot bear the assaults and tumult of the demons, for the flame of carnal
passions darkens my mind. Yet disdain me not, О holy Theotokos, for I set all my
hope on thee.
О Virgin who knewest not wedlock, О all-holy Bride and Lady of God,
through thy prayers loose thou the bonds of my transgressions, and bind me to
Christ with bonds of love, that I may bring forth the virtues as fruit.
Glory ..., Thou art the helper, the bulwark and sure refuge of all Orthodox
Christians, О pure Mary. Wherefore, honoring thee with faith, we cry out to
Christ: О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!
Now & ever ..., The most holy virgin, beholding her Son suspended upon the
Cross, was stricken with awe, and marveling, said: “How can I bear the sight of
Thee slain, Who art the Author and Bestower of life?”
ODE VIII
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a
wonder past nature, * burning not the Children whom it had received, * so
the fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin's womb * into which it
had descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation
bless the Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.
О Theotokos, Sovereign Lady of the world, do thou alone, by thy lovingkindness, lead me up, who by my wicked mind have been plunged into the abyss
of perdition and evils by carnal pleasures and my passionate attachment to the
things of life. For I in nowise have any hope of salvation, being wholly
despondent, О pure one.
Thou art the salvation of all, having given birth ineffably to God. Thou art the
savior of the faithful, О Theotokos, the guide of the blind and the setting aright of
the fallen. Wherefore, praising thee, we cry out to Christ: Bless the Lord, all ye
works! Hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!
Glory ..., Having acquired thee as a most firm bulwark, we have placed in thee
our hope of salvation, О Mother of God. Be thou for thy servants a haven and an
unshakable rampart, and guide us continually, that we may chant: Let all creation
bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!
Now & ever ..., Her womb was rent maternally, and filled with a multitude of
tears, when she who gave birth to Thee in purity beheld Thee on the Cross, she
cried out with inconsolable groaning: “Having escaped pain in Thy birth, О my
Son, I am now held fast by pain, beholding Thy countenance dishonored.“
ODE IX
Irmos: Ineffable is the mystery of the Virgin: * for she is heaven and the
throne of the cherubim, * and hath been revealed as the radiant bridalchamber * of Christ God Almighty. * Wherefore we piously magnify her as
the Theotokos.
I have besmirched my soul with dishonorable passions, wretch that I am, and
have defiled all my flesh with soul-corrupting passions; yet as thou art pure and
undefiled, cleanse me by the magnitude of thy mercy.
I have not acquired any other refuge than thee, О pure Lady, neither do I
know any other steadfast helper and protection on earth. Wherefore, I have fled
with fervor to thee, asking that through thee I might receive deliverance from
offenses.
Glory ..., From on high thou dost now look mercifully upon thy servants, О
all-hymned one, preserving us with pious faith and delivering from every evil
circumstance by thy prayers those who honor thee as the true and honored
Theotokos.
Now & ever ..., When she who knew a seedless birthgiving saw Thee
suspended upon the tree of the Cross, О Thou Who lovest mankind, she cried
aloud: “O my Son and almighty God, in Thy desire to save mankind how hast
Thou now accepted crucifixion?”
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., and
the rest as usual. Dismissal.
ON FRIDAY MORNING: TONE I
AT MATINS
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, these
Sessional hymns of the Cross, in Tone I:
When Thou wast crucified, О Christ, tyranny perished and the power of the
enemy was trampled down; for it was neither an angel nor a man, but Thou
Thyself, О Lord, Who saved us. Glory be to Thee!
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; *
for He is holy.
We bow down before the tree of Thy Cross, О Lover of mankind, for Thou
wast nailed to it, О Life of all, opening paradise to the thief who came to Thee
with faith, and granting food unto him when he confessed Thee, saying:
Remember me, О Lord! As Thou didst accept him, so do Thou also accept us
who cry aloud: We have all sinned! In Thy loving-kindness disdain us not!
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon
the Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming
maternally: * “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings
* which surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns of the Cross,
In Tone I:
Once, the weapon of the Cross was revealed to the pious Emperor
Constantine as an invincible victory over his enemies, because of his faith; for the
adverse powers tremble before it. It was the salvation of the faithful and the boast
of Paul.
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in the
midst of the earth.
О Compassionate One Who of old fashioned Adam from dust, a hand of clay
smote Thee, and Thou didst endure crucifixion, mockery and wounding. О the
wonder! О Thy great long-suffering! Glory, О Lord, to Thy life-bearing sufferings,
whereby Thou hast saved us!
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.
To the Martyrs: Invested by Thee with the boast of suffering and the crown of
honor, О Lord, the glorious passion-bearers patiently endured the wounds
inflicted by the iniquitous, and with divine power received victory from the
heavens. By their supplications free us also from the invisible foe, О Savior, and
save us.
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O
Christ, Thy all-immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the Father
and the Spirit, art beginningless, what is this ineffable dispensation, wherewith
Thou hast saved the work of Thy most pure hands, O Compassionate One?”
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns of the Cross;
In Tone I: “Spec. Mel.: Thy tomb, О Savior ...”:
When the sun beheld Thee suspended in the flesh of Thine own will upon the
tree of the Cross in the tender compassion of Thy mercy, О Word, unable to
abide the blasphemy, it hid its rays. Enlighten my darkened soul with Thine
unapproachable light, and save me, I pray Thee.
Thou wast willingly nailed to the Cross of, О Compassionate One, deifying
our corrupted essence, and killing the serpent, the slayer of mankind. By Thy
precious Cross establish Orthodoxy in peace, and put down the uprisings of
heretics.
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: Having acquired thine aid, О most pure one, by thy
supplications we are delivered from misfortunes; for, preserved everywhere by the
Cross of thy Son, we all piously magnify thee as is meet.
ODE I
Canon of the precious & life-creating Cross, the acrostic whereof is “I praise
the honorable Passion of the Master”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone I:
Irmos: Let us sing a triumphant hymn unto God, * who came to Moses’ aid
in Egypt, * and drowned Pharaoh with all his host: * for He hath been
glorified.
О Word Who art dispassionate by nature, yet didst endure sufferings for our
sake and wast crucified with thieves, Thou didst slay the serpent, the author of
evil, saving those who worship Thee.
Though Thou art the dawning of the East, О Jesus, Thou didst come to the
parts of the West, our rejected nature; and the sun, seeing Thee crucified, hid its
light.
To the Martyrs: Trading well a temporal death for life everlasting, О glorious
spiritual athletes, ye were deemed worthy of the kingdom of heaven; wherefore, ye
are glorified and called blessed.
To the Martyrs: О ye who valiantly emulated the sufferings of Christ, ye cure
the sufferings of those on earth with a mystic therapy, О holy martyrs, and drive
away evil spirits by your words.
Theotokion: When the Ewe-lamb beheld Christ the Lamb lifted up upon the
Cross, she exclaimed, crying aloud: “Whither hath Thy beauty set, О longsuffering Son Who art without beginning?”
Another canon, of the Most Holy Theotokos, in Tone I:
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He
hath been glorified.
In that thou hast given birth in time to the only timeless God, Who became
incarnate, О all-holy and most pure one, heal thou the chronic passions of mine
all-accursed soul.
As thou art merciful, О most pure one, by thy supplications do away with the
wounds of my soul, the perversity of my heart, the darkening of my thoughts and
the turning away of my mind.
О most pure one, who hast given birth to the Light, my Redeemer, deliver me
from everlasting torments, that, saved, I may hymn thy tender compassion.
I am engulfed in the abyss of evils and the tumult of the passions, yet I call
upon thy tranquility, О most pure one: Save me, for thou art the haven of the
faithful!
ODE III
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon
the waters, * O all-powerful One.
Thou didst stretch out Thy hands upon the Cross, staining Thy divine fingers
with blood, and delivering Adam, the work of Thy hands, О Master, from the
hands of the slayer, in that Thou alone art good and the Lover of mankind.
Thou wast lifted up upon the Tree and wast pierced in the side by a spear, О
Master, setting aright the fall caused by Eve, Adam’s rib, whom of old misfortune
befell through the fruit of the tree; and thou didst lead them into paradise with the
honest thief.
To the Martyrs: With pure minds and chanting let us hymn the martyrs of the
Lord: the confirmation of the Church, the rampart and towers of piety, the
destroyers of the enemy.
To the Martyrs: As divine branches of the noetic Vine, the martyrs manifestly
produced for us the grapes which pour forth the wine which gladdeneth the hearts
of all the faithful.
Theotokion: Through His Cross, the blessed Fruit of thy womb О all-hymned
Virgin, hath made those corrupted by the fruit of the tree partakers of
incorruption, for the sake of His Cross.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon
the waters, * O all-powerful One.
Do away with all the barrenness of mine unfruitful thoughts, and show my
soul to be fruitful through the virtues, О most pure Theotokos, helper of the
faithful.
О all-immaculate one who hast given birth to the paternal Light, deliver me
from every evil circumstance, from the many temptations of the serpent, and from
eternal fire and darkness.
Wholly condemned am I by the dread tribunal, the unquenchable fire and the
stern sentence, О most pure one. Hasten thou, О most pure Lady, to save me, thy
servant.
To deify mankind, God became a man through thee, in a manner past all
telling and understanding, О pure Virgin; wherefore, all of us the faithful together
call thee blessed.
ODE IV
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord * and I am afraid. * Having
understood Thy works, * I have glorified Thy might, * thus said the
prophet.
Though Thou art the righteous Bestower of the law, Thou wast reckoned
among the lawless, and wast lifted up upon the Tree, desiring to justify all, О Lord
our Benefactor.
All the angelic hosts marveled, beholding Thee, the Sun, uplifted upon the
Cross; and the hordes of the prince of darkness were vanquished.
To the Martyrs: Having drawn forth the grace of healings from the gifts of the
Spirit, by the grace of God the martyrs wash away soul-corrupting passions for all.
To the Martyrs: Having shaken off the slumber of indifference, with godly
vigilance and faith the passion-bearers tamed the savagery of the wild beasts and
suffered, rejoicing.
Theotokion: “Woe is me, О my Child! What shall I do? How can I bear to see
Thee, Who givest life, suspended upon the Tree, unjustly put to death?” said the
Virgin, weeping.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of
the Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh,
Thou shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown
forth! * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!
О Virgin Theotokos, thou undefiled tabernacle, by thy compassions, as with
outpourings of great purity, cleanse me who am defiled by transgressions, and
grant me a helping-hand, that I may cry: Glory to thee, О pure Bride of God!
Thou wast shown to be a temple dedicated to God Who made His abode
within thee in a manner transcending understanding. Him do thou entreat, that
He cleanse us of the defilements of sin, that we may be known to be the temples
and habitations of the Spirit.
Have mercy on me, О Theotokos, who alone hast given birth to the
Wellspring of mercies; and do away with the grievous illness of my soul and the
perplexity of my heart. Before the end grant me compunction, a stream of tears,
and deliverance from evils.
О holy Theotokos who hast given birth to the Most Holy One in the flesh,
sanctify us, that we may emulate Him Whose desire it was to become like men;
and by thy supplications show us all to share in the kingdom of heaven, О most
pure one.
ODE V
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light * upon us who rise early
at dawn, * unto the judgments of Thy commandments, * O Master, Lover
of mankind, * Christ our God.
Uplifted upon the Cross in the flesh, Thou didst call to the knowledge of Thee
the nations who knew Thee not, О Judge of all, О only merciful Christ our God.
When Thou didst stand before the unjust tribunal, О righteous Lord, Adam,
who before was condemned, was justified; and he crieth out: Glory to Thy
crucifixion, О long-suffering Lord!
To the Martyrs: Ye were shown to be like a divinely planted garden of
paradise, О martyrs, having your honored sufferings as fragrant flowers, whereby
the soul of each of the faithful is filled with sweet fragrance.
To the Martyrs: Let us hymn the martyrs of the Lord, the blossom-laden and
right fruitful trees which put forth the fruit of faith in immortality, and pulled up
the roots of evil.
Theotokion: When the precious rod who produced the never-fading Bloom
beheld Him uplifted upon the Tree, she cried: “O Master, leave me not childless!”
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, * for we know no other God
than Thee, * and we call upon Thy Name, * for Thou art the God of the
living and the dead.
The wicked tasting in Eden once made me subject to mortality, but do thou,
О most pure one who hast given birth unto Life, enliven me now who of old was
slain by the tree, and grant me compunction.
Save me from cruel misfortunes, О most pure one, raise me up out of the mire
of the passions, and deliver me, Thine useless servant, from the captivity and
oppression of the evil demons.
Enlighten the eyes of my soul, that I may ever gaze upon thy divine radiance
and glory, О pure and all-immaculate one, and may receive mercy and everlasting
glory.
О pure Virgin Mother, we know thee to be the cloud and garden of paradise,
the portal of the Light, the table, the fleece, the jar containing manna, the
sweetness of the world.
ODE VI
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: Thou didst save the Prophet from the sea monster, O Lover of
mankind; * lead me up also I pray, * from the abyss of transgressions.
О Christ Who dost surpass all honor, lifted up upon the Cross Thou didst
endure dishonor, desiring to honor mankind.
O supremely good Christ our God, Who wast beaten with a reed, Thou hast
signed an emancipation edict for me who have been enslaved to delusion.
To the Martyrs: Through painful sufferings ye passed over to the end which is
devoid of pain, О holy ones, and have been deemed worthy of ineffable joy.
To the Martyrs: Ye were set afire by the burning coals of the love of Christ, О
most wise ones; wherefore, cast into the fire ye remained unconsumed.
Theotokion: After giving birth, О all-immaculate one, thou didst remain as
thou wast before birthgiving; for thou hast given birth unto God Who saved
mankind by the Tree.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the
world, Glory be to Thee!
I pray to thee, the only good one, the undefiled tabernacle: By your mediation
wash away all defilement from me who have been defiled by many sins.
Be thou a guide for me who am tossed about on the deep of evils by the needs
of life, О pure one; steer me to the true harbor, and save me.
Threefold billows of wicked thoughts, assaults of the passions and the abyss of
sin overwhelm my wretched soul. Help me, О holy Lady!
О Mary, thou sacred tabernacle which hath been revealed, sanctify my
wretched soul, which hath been defiled by pleasures.
ODE VII
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: The furnace became bedewed, O Savior, * and the children dancing,
chanted: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!
When Thou wast crucified, Thou didst shake creation; and when Thou didst
die, Thou didst slay the serpent. Blessed art Thou, О Christ, God of our fathers!
Thou didst taste gall, О Long-suffering One, pouring forth the sweetness of
salvation upon me who was deprived of the food of paradise through pleasurable
eating.
To the Martyrs: Having their nails torn out, and having set aside the
coarseness of mortality, the martyrs received divine beauty from God.
To the Martyrs: Emulating the most pure sufferings of Christ by your own
sufferings, О valiant martyrs, ye easily bore the wounds inflicted by the enemy.
Theotokion: Seeing Thee, the Lord, crucified, the immaculate Theotokos said:
“Woe is me, О my Son! How is it that Thou diest, О Life and Hope of the
faithful?”
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: When Thy children were in the furnace O savior, * and remained
untouched by the flame, * with one voice the three chanted * and blessed
Thee saying: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!
Sanctify my soul, which hath been defiled by the passions, О most pure Bride
of God, and quickly bring an end to the grievous captivity of my mind, the
perplexity of my heart and the onslaughts of the demons.
Enliven my mind, which hath been driven to death by carnal passions, О allimmaculate one, and strengthen me to do works pleasing unto God, that I may
magnify thee and ever glorify thy compassion.
О Virgin Mother, who alone hast given birth unto God, mortify my carnal
pleasures and quickly remove the defilement of my soul. Deliver me from the
inquisition of the demons, and save me.
Arrayed in godly virtues, thou hast given birth to the Word Who with the
Father is equally without beginning, and Who hath truly covered the heavens with
virtues, О pure Virgin. Him do thou ever entreat, that He have pity on us.
ODE VIII
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: Unto Christ who saved the children * that sang His praises * and
who bedewed the raging furnace, * let us hymn and supremely exalt
throughout all ages.
When Thou wast nailed to the Cross, О Savior, creation was shaken, the sun
stopped its shining, and the rocks split asunder; and Hades was soon emptied,
unable to withstand Thy might.
О Compassionate One, Thou didst hang naked on the Tree, suffering
condemnation for the condemnation of him who was cast out, receiving
nakedness. Great is Thy might and long-suffering!
To the Martyrs: Armed with the Cross as with a breast-plate, the warriors of
Christ, who dwell with the incorporeal ones, arrayed themselves against the
adversary and trampled him beneath their beautiful feet.
To the Martyrs: Their members broken, the valiant ones stood with hammers
in the midst of the tribunal, demolishing the edifice of deception and razing the
temples of the demons.
Theotokion: Beholding Him Who alone is most high uplifted upon the Tree
and putting down the uprisings of the enemy, she who is more exalted than the
heavens hymned Him aloud.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages.
In a godly manner He Who is incorporeal became incarnate from thee. Him
do thou beseech, О most pure one, that He slay my carnal passions and give life
to my soul, which hath been slain by my sins.
О most pure one, thou hast given birth to God the Savior, Who healeth the
contrition of Adam, who had been fashioned from dust. Him do thou entreat,
that He heal the incurably painful wounds of my soul.
Raise me up who lie in the depths of evils, vanquish now him who wageth war
against me, О pure one, and disdain not my soul, which hath been wounded by
unseemly pleasures. Have pity, О most pure one, and save me.
By thy vigilant prayers unto God we, who know thee to be the blessed and
joyous Theotokos, are delivered from all manner of temptations, О most pure
one.
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...”, and make prostrations.
ODE IX
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: Moses saw thee as the bush * unconsumed by fire, * and Jacob
beheld thee as the living ladder * and the gate of heaven, * through which
Christ our God hath passed. * In our hymns, O pure Mother, thee do we
magnify.
O how the disobedient people gave over to the Cross Thee, the only Longsuffering One, Who didst willingly impoverish Thyself, accepted sufferings, and
by dispassion became a Mediator for all who had stumbled, from Adam on.
Thou didst undergo a shameful crucifixion in the flesh, О Christ, desiring to
honor man who was dishonored by irrational passions and had marred his ancient
beauty. Glory be to Thy tender compassion, which transcendeth understanding!
To the Martyrs: To the light of Thine ineffable glory and radiance didst Thou
guide those who rose at dawn unto Thee, and who, led by Thy hand, traversed the
darkness of sufferings, О Christ, Thou never-setting Sun. Wherefore, by their
supplications enlighten us.
To the Martyrs: The company of the sacred martyrs vanquished the myriads of
the noetic foe; they enrolled among the myriads of the holy powers, and at the
command of the Creator of all ever heal the myriad passions of our souls.
Theotokion: With the light of the Light Who shone forth from thee in the
flesh, О Virgin, illumine my mind and enlighten my heart, driving away the
darkness of sin and dispelling all the gloom of my despondency.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of
all descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom
He was incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as
the pure Mother of God.
Loving sin, I abide in slothfulness, О pure one, and I tremble before the
inescapable tribunal. Keep me uncondemned thereat by thy holy supplications, О
most pure Bride of God, that I may bless thee as mine intercessor.
I am terrified of the tribunal and the unforgettable eye of thy Son, О Virgin,
for I have committed many sins on earth; wherefore, I cry unto thee: О most
loving Lady, help me, deliver me from tribulations then, О pure one, and save me.
How terrible is the day of trial, О Maiden! How horrible the sentence! How
bitter the misfortune! How can I endure more, О most pure Lady? Have mercy
upon my passion-fraught soul, and before the end grant me remission, О most
pure one.
О thou who hast given birth to the divine Light Who shone forth from the
Father, have pity on my soul, which hath been darkened by the deceptions of life
and hath become an object of the mockery of the demons, О all-immaculate one;
and grant unto me the light of saving repentance, О pure one.
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...”, and a prostration.
Litany: Let us complete ..., Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms.
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Cross, in Tone I:
We unceasingly hymn Thee as Savior and Master, Who wast nailed to the Tree
and hast given us life.
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons.
By Thy Cross have angels and mortals been united into one flock, О Christ,
and in a single assemblage heaven and earth rejoice, crying: Glory to Thee, О
Lord!
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our
hands do Thou guide aright.
To the Martyrs: О ye people, come, let us all honor the passion-bearers of
Christ with hymns and spiritual songs: the luminaries of the world, the preachers
of the Faith, the ever-flowing wellsprings from whence healings pour forth upon
all peoples. By their supplications, О Christ our God, grant peace to Thy world
and great mercy to our souls.
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Spec. Mel.: “О all-praised martyrs ...”:
Stavrotheotokion: When she beheld the Lamb upon the Cross * bereft of form
and beauty, * the all-immaculate ewe-lamb and Lady * said weeping: “Woe is me!
* Where hath Thy comeliness gone, O Thou Who art most sweet? * Where is the
shining grace * of Thine image, ** O my Son most beloved?”
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia.
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal.
FRIDAY MORNING: TONE I
AT LITURGY
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone I:
By food did enemy led Adam out of paradise, but by the Cross Christ led back
into it the thief who cried out: Remember me, О Lord, when Thou comest in Thy
kingdom!
When Thou wast crucified, О sinless Christ, Thou didst take the sins of all
upon Thyself; and when Thou wast pierced in the side, Thou didst pour forth
blood and water; torrents of salvation, rebuilding that which had been broken
down by corruption.
О compassionate Jesus our God, Who wast nailed to the Tree of Thine own
will, Thou didst take away all the passion-fraught understanding of Adam; and by
Thy precious wounds didst wound the multitude of the demons.
To the Martyrs: Having emulated the sufferings of Him Who suffered
willingly in the flesh, О glorious martyrs, ye ever heal incurable sufferings and
drive ailments away from all by the power of the Spirit.
Glory ..., Thee do we glorify, the Trinity equal in power and one in honor, the
beginningless God; and with faith we magnify the Father, the Son and the Holy
Spirit, the single Godhead in three Hypostases.
Now & ever ..., When she who gave Thee birth in the flesh saw Thee nailed to
the Cross, О Christ God, she exclaimed, weeping: “How hath the iniquitous
assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, О my Son?”
On Friday, the Prokeimenon in Tone VII:
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the
footstool of His feet, for He is holy.
Verse: The Lord is King, let the peoples rage.
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast
purchased from the beginning.
Verse: God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the
midst of the earth.
Communion Verse: Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth,
O God.