SUNDAY EVENING: TONE II
AT VESPERS
On “Lord, I have, cried ...”, 3 Stichera of repentance, in Tone II:
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness.
Possessing a wellspring of loving-kindness, * and ever pouring forth Thy
mercy from the depths thereof, * О supremely good Father, * Son and Word of
the Father, and Holy Spirit, * Thou uncreated Essence: * Accept our supplication
and prayer, * and grant forgiveness unto all who abide in transgressions, * in that
Thou art a compassionate God ** and lovest mankind.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
Having by nature unfathomable depths of compassion, * mercy and goodness;
* we beseech Thee, О Christ our Savior, * falling down before Thee, crying, and
ever calling out to Thee: * Grant unto Thy servants * remission of their many
transgressions * and forgiveness of all things wherein they have offended, * in that
Thou art a compassionate God ** and lovest mankind.
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
As God and the Savior of all, * desiring to save us for whose sake Thou didst
assume flesh, * and manifest Thyself as a man. * Do Thou Save us who bow
down before Thy commandments, О Lover of mankind, * for Thou didst not
come to save the righteous, * but through the grace of divine baptism, * Thou
didst come to loose us who are bound by the chains * of the multitude of our sins
and transgressions, ** in that Thou art a compassionate God and lovest mankind.
Then the Stichera of the saint, from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these
Stichera of the incorporeal hosts, in the same melody:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
The thrones, cherubim and seraphim, * the dominions and powers, * and the
honorable authorities, * and with them the angels, archangels and principalities, *
together chant unceasing hymns unto Him * Who fashioned their incorruptible
essence, * teaching all to worship in Trinity * the One Being Who is conjoined,
equal in honor, ** and co-enthroned.
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
The primary choirs * of the immaterial beings, * directly emitting the effulgent
rays of the Godhead, * proclaim in their ranks * the divine radiance unto the rest;
* and impart these to us through the law of love, * and likewise by dignity, * unto
each according to his yearning ** for purity of heart.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
Lifting up the heart’s eye of our soul * within our souls, * we ever stretch forth
the yearnings of our mind with divine love, * that, illumined by the rays emitted
thereby, * we may escape the darkness of the passions, * hoping that we may
stand with the angels * before the dread throne of the Creator, ** and be
transformed from light to light.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
With thrice-holy voices, О most pure one, * the multitude of thy Son's angels
hymn thee, * who art ever His fiery throne, * animate palace, and divine bridge *
leading to Him from the earth. * And together with the Archangel Gabriel * they
cry out to thee: * Rejoice, О joyous one, ** for thou hast given birth to the Source
of joy!
Then, “О Joyous Light ...”, the Prokeimenon in Tone VIII:
Prokeimenon: Behold now, bless ye the Lord, * all ye servants of the Lord.
Verse: Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of
our God.
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of compunction, in Tone II:
Like the prodigal son I have sinned against Thee, О Savior. Accept me who
am penitent, О Father. Have mercy on me, О God!
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress,
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us.
With the cry of the publican I cry out to Thee, О Christ my Savior: Cleanse me
as Thou didst him, and have mercy on me, О God!
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.
To the Martyrs: Having hated the pleasures of the earth, the passion-bearers
were granted the good things of heaven and became fellow citizens with the
angels. By their supplications, О Lord, have mercy and save us.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Rejoice, O Theotokos Mary, * thou indestructible and surpassingly holy
temple; * as the prophet crieth out: ** Holy is thy temple, wondrous in
righteousness!
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion through Our
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal.
SUNDAY NIGHT: TONE II
AT COMPLINE
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos
ODE I
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh's whole
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified.
Having taken our form from thee, the never-setting Sun manifestly showed
thee forth as a noetic and most splendid heaven. Wherefore, deliver me from the
stench of the passions, that with love I may hymn thee, the only Virgin Mother.
I beseech thee, О Lady, who art the tongs which held the noetic Ember which
hath purified human nature: Wash away the defilement of my manifold
transgressions, and by thy supplications deliver me from defiling passions.
Glory ..., О most pure Theotokos, who hast given birth to Christ, the
Wellspring of mercy, and hast opened Eden to mankind: open unto me the
portals of thy mercy, and grant me forgiveness offenses, О Sovereign Lady of the
world.
Now & ever ..., Rend asunder the bonds of my transgressions, О Ever-virgin
Lady, entreating thy Son and God; and cast down sin which oppresseth me, that,
saved, I may ever hymn thee, О most immaculate one.
ODE III
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I
sing: * There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than
Thee, O Lord.
Dispel the gloom and darkness of my passions with the rays of thy
supplications, and enlighten me, О most pure Lady who hast given birth to Christ,
the never-setting Sun Who shone forth from the Sun before the morning-star.
By thy birthgiving, О most pure one, thou hast restored the fallen and broken
tabernacle of David thy father; wherefore, О Theotokos, raise me up, thy servant,
who am crushed by transgressions and the passions.
Glory ..., Be thou a sword, О Virgin, driving away the sins and passions of my
soul, and show me to be another garden of paradise, preserved by thee unassailed, offering thee the flowers of the Spirit.
Now & ever ..., Stretching forth the hand of compassions, receive me, О
Birthgiver of God, and from all condemnation rescue me who flee to thee, and
falling down before thee, call upon thine aid.
ODE IV
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.
Taking the leaven of human nature like dough, the Creator made it undefiled
and holy; and washing me clean of the defilement of the passions, He hath
cleansed me of the mire of my transgressions.
With the remedy of thy prayers, as with bandages and oil, О pure Lady, heal
now the stripes of my soul and the wounds of sin, in that thou hast given birth to
the divine Healing of nature.
Glory ..., Loose thou the bonds of my passions, О Lady, and cleave asunder
the chains of my sins with the sword of thy prayers, О thou who hast given birth
to Christ Who granteth deliverance to those bound in Hades.
Now & ever ..., Cure thou the passions of my soul which most wretchedly
shroud me in gloom, and enlighten my thoughts, О pure one, driving far away the
darkness of the demons who oppress me and who lay traps for me all the day
long.
ODE V
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness
of sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with
Thy radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee.
Thou hast delivered the world from the ancient curse, О Lady who hast given
birth to Christ, the Blessing of the world. Deliver me from unseemly thoughts and
from all grief, for thou alone art the joy of the faithful.
A horde of demons surroundeth the city of my soul, striving mightily to take it
captive. О most glorious Lady, thou city of the King of all, defend me by thy
supplications as with entowered ramparts, and save me.
Glory ..., The cruel storm of the sedition of the spirits of evil doth trouble my
mind. Quickly anticipate my need, and still it, О thou who hast given birth to
Christ, the only almighty Helmsman of all creation.
Now & ever ..., О Birthgiver of God, shine the light of repentance upon me
who am enclosed in the darkness of perdition. Give a helping hand to me who lie
prostrate, and by thy supplications raise me up, О pure one, that I may
accomplish the judgments of God.
ODE VI
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God.
As thou hast given birth to Life everlasting, О most pure one, when my soul
departeth from my body, slay death by thy supplications.
The serpent who hates mankind pursues me, subjecting me to trials. О Lady,
set him at naught, for thou hast given birth to Him Who crushed the heads of the
serpents.
Glory ..., О thou who hast given birth to Christ our God, the Way of life, to
the straight path direct me who walk with faltering steps.
Now & ever ..., Heal the sufferings of my soul and vanquish the perplexity of
grief, О most pure one who hast given birth to God, for our salvation.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone II:
As the wellspring of loving-kindness, О Theotokos, grant mercy unto us. Look
upon the people who have sinned, and show forth, as ever, thy power; for,
trusting in thee, we cry out to thee: Rejoice!’’, as once did Gabriel, the supreme
commander of the incorporeal beings.
ODE VII
Irmos: The wise children did not adore the golden idol, * but went
themselves into the flame and defied the pagan gods. * They prayed in the
midst of the flame, * and an Angel bedewed them saying: * ‘The prayer of
your lips hath been heard’.
The waves of the passions trouble my mind and shake my soul; yet, О Virgin
who hast given birth to Him Who by His divine command restrained the raging
sea, transport me to the tranquility of dispassion and halt the turmoil of my flesh.
Knowing thee to be the gate of the noetic East who hast appeared from
heaven, О Virgin. I, thy servant, pray that through thee I might enter into the
heavens. Wherefore, accept me, О Lady, and guide me by thy light.
Glory ..., Crucified on the Cross of His own will, Christ thy Son put the
princes of darkness to shame and destroyed the corrupting power of death.
Thereby, О most pure Lady, do thou slay the passion-plagued understanding of
my flesh.
Now & ever ..., Cease not, О pure one, to pray to God Who was born from
thee, on behalf of those who approach thee with faith and ask deliverance, О only
helper of the world, for thou art the hope and help of the despairing and the aid
of those who are ever tempest-tossed amid evils.
ODE VIII
Irmos: Disdaining the golden image, the thrice-blessed children, *
beholding the immutable and living image of God, * chanted in the midst
of the flame: * Let all existing creation hymn the Lord * and supremely
exalt Him throughout all ages!
О Virgin, thou divinely made tabernacle of the Holy of holies, of Him Who
set thee forth as the image of the ancient tabernacle, having the great High Priest
in thy midst: Show my heart to be a holy tabernacle of the Most High: Christ, the
King of all.
Having borne, О Virgin, the divine ark and the tablets of the law: the most
pure Word of God, Christ, thine uncircumscribable Son: by thy prayers, as with
the finger of God, inscribe Him upon the surface of my soul.
Glory ..., As from a mountain the precious Stone hath been cut from thy
womb, О most immaculate Lady, and as the only Almighty One He hath broken
the pillars of all falsehood. Thereby do thou now destroy the images of the
passions of my soul, having broken the jaws of the noetic foe.
Now & ever ..., With the waters of life, О Virgin Theotokos, water thou my
heart which hath been seared by the flame of sin, ever preserving me in
compunction, who chant with fear: Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!
ODE IX
Irmos: Thee do we magnify, O blessed and all-pure Theotokos, * who
through thy virginal womb ineffably brought forth * God incarnate, * the
Luminary Who shone forth before the sun * and hath come to us in the
flesh.
Thou didst shine forth Christ, the Sun of righteousness, О pure one, showing
thyself to be a most radiant heaven. By thy supplications destroy the night of my
passions, illumine my soul, and enlighten and make bright my heart.
Condemn and trample underfoot mine adversary, О Theotokos, and deliver
me from his oppression; for thou hast given birth to the Good and Righteous
One Who resteth in the bosom of the Godhead and hath condemned death.
Glory ..., He Who as God formed the essence of the incorporeal ones became
incarnate from thee, О Virgin Maiden. Wherefore, by thy supplications deliver
me, thy servant, from the evil circumstances and the carnal understanding of the
passions of the flesh.
Now & ever ..., Thou hast done away with the grief of Eve, having given birth
to the new Adam Who created the nature of the first Adam. Wherefore, erase also
with the record of my transgressions, freeing me from perils, sorrows and the
passions.
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ...,
And the rest as usual. Dismissal.
ON MONDAY MORNING: TONE II
AT MATINS
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,
The Sessional hymns of compunction, in Tone II:
Like the waves of the sea, mine iniquities have risen up against me, and I alone
am floundering like a ship upon the deep, under the weight of many offenses; but
steer me to the calm harbor of repentance, О God, and save me.
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy
wrath.
I am a barren tree, in nowise producing the fruit of repentance, О Lord; and I
fear lest I be cut down, and am terrified of that unquenchable fire which is to
come. Wherefore, I entreat Thee: Before those misfortunes, do Thou turn and
save me!
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
As the well-spring of loving-kindness, О Theotokos, grant mercy unto us.
Look upon the people who have sinned, and show forth, as ever, thy power; for,
trusting in thee, we cry out to thee: Rejoice!’’, as once did Gabriel, the supreme
commander of the incorporeal beings.
After the 2nd, chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone II:
“Have mercy on me,” said David; and I cry unto Thee: “I have sinned, О
Savior! Cleanse me of my sins through repentance, and have mercy upon me!”
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy
wrath.
“Have mercy on me, О God, have mercy on me!”, David wept over his two
sins; and I cry out to Thee over my tens of thousands of transgressions. He made
his bed moist with tears, but I shed nary a one. I am in despair, and pray: “Have
mercy on me, О God, according to Thy great mercy!”
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.
To the Martyrs: Having as their vesture Thee Who dost clothe the sky with
clouds, the saints endured torments in the world at the hands of the iniquitous,
and set at naught the falsehood of the idols. By their supplications, О Savior, free
us from the invisible foe, and save us.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
We magnify thee, О Theotokos, crying aloud: Rejoice, О cloud of the neversetting Sun, who didst bear the Lord of glory within thy womb!
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone II:
Spec. Mel.: “As a wellspring of loving-kindness ...”:
Sinning in ignorance and in knowledge, night and day, I, alone on the earth,
anger Thee by mine iniquities, О Christ. О Good One, Who alone art sinless, and
Who in Thy tender compassion hast come to call sinners to repentance, save me
by the prayers of Thine angels.
The most holy choirs of the incorporeal ones beseech Thee, the good Master,
to have pity at the hour of judgment, that; from bitter torment, the malice of the
demons, the darkness of the passions and every threat, Thou wilt deliver us who
with love have recourse to their protection.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
О pure, unwedded Theotokos, who without seed hast given birth to the
Master of all, with the angels entreat Him, that we may be delivered from all
doubt, and that He grant compunction and light unto our souls, and the cleansing
offenses, О thou who alone art quick to help.
ODE I
Canon of repentance to our Lord Jesus Christ & His holy martyrs, the
acrostic whereof is “Grant me an outpouring of tears, О Word of God”,
the composition of Joseph, in Tone II:
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought
up out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.
O Word Who didst become incarnate, and camest not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance: Accept me, who have greatly sinned, and save me!
I alone have been enslaved to sins; I alone have opened the door to the
passions! О Thou Who alone art easy to appease, turning me back to Thee, save
me in Thy loving-kindness.
To the Martyrs: Wearing crowns, the passion-bearers stand before Thy
judgment-seat, О Lord, having triumphed over the audacity of the evil one and
been enriched with immortality.
To the Martyrs: Pouring forth streams of healings upon us, the passion-bearers
ever dry up the torrents of our carnal passions by the power of the divine Spirit.
Theotokion: О Maiden who hast given birth to the Wellspring of dispassion,
heal me, who have been wounded by the passions, and rescue me from everlasting
fire, О thou who alone art full of the grace of God.
Another canon, of the holy, incorporeal angelic hosts of heaven, the acrostic
whereof is: “I sing praise to the angelic choir”, of Theophanes, in Tone II.
Irmos: Traversing dryshod the impassible, peculiar path in the sea, * Israel
the chosen cried aloud: * Let us chant unto the Lord, * for He hath been
glorified!
The choirs of the incorporeal beings who glorify Thee as almighty, О Christ,
didst Thou reveal to be God-bearing coals set afire by the radiance of Thine
essence.
Having acquired the power of incorruption and been given the glory of
immortality, the angels are enlightened by drawing nigh unto Thee, О Christ.
As perceptible images of purity, the angels were revealed as light-bearers,
showing forth the immaterial nature of their essence in their forms, О Christ.
Theotokion: Rejoicing, О pure Virgin, the ranks of the angels ministered at thy
birthgiving, which transcendeth nature; for thou hast given birth to their God and
Lord.
ODE III
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in
Thee, * and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee.
Christ Who didst enter into an incorrupt womb, through repentance restore
my soul, which hath been corrupted by the passions, and reveal it to be full of
everlasting light.
I have been obedient to the enraging enemy, having committed every sin, and
have mindlessly angered Thee, the only Long-suffering One, О Lover of mankind.
To the Martyrs: Protected by the Cross, in God the invincible warriors and
martyrs of the Savior valiantly demolished the fortresses of falsehood as though
they were ramparts.
To the Martyrs: Your weakness strengthened by divine power, О valiant
passion-bearers, ye gave the might of the adversary over to utter destruction.
Theotokion: О Mary, thou golden censer, dispel the stench of my passions,
and make me steadfast, who am shaken by the assaults of the lying enemy.
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath been broken * by Thy might, O Christ,
* and the enfeebled * have girded themselves with power. 
God Who by nature is deathless, most wisely acting through grace, revealeth
the immortal armies. (Twice)
Standing now in your uttermost desire before Christ, О angels, pray ye that all
of us may be saved.
Theotokion: The Creator of the ages is known to have accepted a beginning
under time through thee, О Ever-virgin.
ODE IV
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.
Falling into the mire of sin, I destroyed my higher comeliness, О Lord, and I
fear torment. Wherefore, with the beauty of repentance enlighten my humbled
soul.
With lying words the deceiver who stole me away from Thee hath made me
food for him to devour. О God of all, rescue me from his malice, and call me to
Thee through examples of repentance.
To the Martyrs: Having Christ as your helper when ye were cast forth to be
devoured by the wild beasts, burned with fire, maimed and dismembered, О
martyrs, ye did not deny Him. Earnestly beseech Him on behalf of me, the
wretched one.
To the Martyrs: Worshipping the Unity in essence, the Trinity of Hypostases,
the uncreated Godhead, and in nowise worshipping any created thing, ye were
known as martyrs of Christ; wherefore, ye endured all manner of tortures.
Theotokion: Of His own will, the Lord took flesh of thy pure blood and
united Himself to mankind, О pure and most pure one; and, ever appeased by
thine entreaties, He receiveth those who repent, who from of old have been
immersed in sin.
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: I have heard report O Lord, * of Thy glorious dispensation, * and I
have glorified, Thine unapproachable power, * O Lover of mankind.
I bring before Thee the incorporeal ones as advocates, О Compassionate One.
Accepting them, in that Thou art full of loving-kindness, deliver me from sins.
Purified, the divine intelligences draw nigh to the all-accomplishing Mind, and
are enlightened with transcendent understanding.
Adorned by the divine Spirit, the divine adornments of the heavenly ranks are
immutably preserved.
Theotokion: Perceiving thee from afar, Isaiah foretold thee as the one who
would bear God incarnate in thine arms, О Virgin.
ODE V
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.
О Thou Who gave light to the eyes of the blind man, enlighten my blinded
soul, and strengthen it to keep awake for the doing of good, and utterly to hate
the sleep of slothfulness.
О only Savior, Who of old healed the wounds of him who fell among thieves,
heal Thou my soul, which hath truly sustained a grievous wound.
To the Martyrs: Enduring multifarious torments, the company of honored
spiritual athletes put the council of iniquitous tyrants to shame; and it now ever
rejoiceth with the sacred bands of the angels.
To the Martyrs: The most radiant martyrs have been revealed to be stars of
great brilliance, emitting rays of patience and enlightening the souls of the faithful
with the divine Spirit.
Theotokion: Unto us hast thou given birth to the paternal God as a little babe,
having two wills and two activities, in that He is both man and God, О allhymned one.
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: The burning Ember was revealed to Isaiah, * and the Sun hath
shone forth from the Virgin's womb, * granting the enlightenment of the
knowledge of God * to those who in darkness have gone astray.
The cherubim and seraphim, shining forth in splendor with the supremely
exalted thrones near the divine Godhead, divinely illumine all other beings.
(Twice)
О Word of God, Bestower of all effulgence, Thou didst bring into being the
luminous reflections, who receive Thy radiance with gladness and sure
understanding.
Theotokion: The sacred Archangel Gabriel, having flown down from heaven,
О pure Bride of God, declared unto thee that “Rejoice!” which hath released our
first parents from grief.
ODE VI
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God.
I have fallen headlong through the malice of the serpent, and lie upon the bed
of despair. О Christ Who by Thy word raised up paralytics, raise me up also.
Save me, as Thou didst Peter, О Lord, for I am buffeted by the winds of the
serpent and am ever engulfed by the billows of sin.
To the Martyrs: Far exceeding the limits of nature, ye supra-naturally endured
tortures, О martyrs; wherefore, ye have been deemed worthy of good things
transcending understanding.
To the Martyrs: As ones good, comely, and honorable, О most glorious
martyrs, ye have united yourselves to the Beautiful One, the Creator of the good;
and ye ever pray for us.
Theotokion: О all-immaculate one, the Creator chose thee from among all
generations, as the beauty of Jacob, whom He hath loved; and, shining forth from
thee, He revealed Himself.
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: O Master, hearkening unto the sound of entreaties * from a soul in
pain, * do Thou deliver me from my grievous sins, * for Thou alone art the
Cause of our salvation.
The divine points of the glory of Thy primary light, glowing with the
effulgence of Thy splendor, О Master Christ, remain eternally brilliant in radiance.
(Twice)
Strengthened by divine power, and crying out the thrice-holy hymn with
unceasing voices, the seraphim lead in worshipping the Essence in three
Hypostases.
Theotokion: The Lord swore in truth unto David, as He said of old; and in
issuing forth from thy womb He fulfilled His word, for thou hast given birth unto
Him Who reigneth over heaven and earth, О Maiden.
ODE VII
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of
the flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed
art Thou! 
With a dissolute mind and by the attacks of demons I am filled with all manner
of shame; and like the prodigal I find myself far removed from Thy
commandments. But turning now, I cry: “I have sinned like him, but despise me
not, О Jesus Who didst become incarnate for my sake!”
О God of all, of old Thou didst save the repentant Ninevites from the
chastisement which would have brought death upon them. Thus also, О only
Lover of mankind, deliver from grievous torments my heart which hath been
defiled by gross fornication, yet returneth now to Thee.
To the Martyrs: О divine martyrs blessed by God, the malicious one who
desired to wound you was cruelly wounded, remaining unhealed; but your wounds
have been shown to be healing for all the faithful, who have been wounded by the
assault of him who of old caused us to stumble.
To the Martyrs: Ye feared neither savage beasts, nor tyrants’ threats, nor fire,
nor stripes, nor the severing sword, nor red-hot instruments, О great martyrs, but
endured them all as though in others’ bodies; wherefore, ye have been crowned.
Theotokion: О most pure Maiden, Bride of God, thy womb became the abode
of the immaterial Light, Who hath dispelled ungodliness with the radiance of
divine understanding; and, hymning Him, we cry aloud: Blessed is the God of our
fathers!
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: Of old the youths revealed themselves to be rhetors * with a
supreme love for wisdom, * for from the depths of their God-pleasing souls,
* they theologized with their lips as they sang: * O supremely divine God of
our fathers, blessed art Thou!
Ever joining chorus round about the throne of Thine ineffable glory, the
celestial intelligences sing with unceasing voices: О supremely divine God of our
fathers, blessed art Thou! (Twice)
When the angelic ranks beheld Thee borne aloft in the flesh into the heavens,
they opened wide the celestial gates unto Thee, saying: О supremely divine God
of our fathers, blessed art Thou!
Theotokion: Showing thee to be the beginning of the law and the prophets,
Gabriel cried out, О Maiden: “Lo! thou who alone art all-hymned shalt give birth
to the supremely divine and blessed God of the fathers and of us!”
ODE VIII
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful,
who chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
I have fallen to the evil one, and been held captive by his wiles; and, seeing me
stuck fast in utter hopelessness, the deceiver boasts greatly; wherefore, rescue me,
О Compassionate One, Who art the conversion of those in error.
Loose me, who am held fast by the unbreakable bonds of carnal passions, О
Christ, Thou Savior of the world, Who didst loose those fettered with everlasting
chains; and guide me to seek the ways of salvation.
To the Martyrs: Those who are the cause of the passions have truly brought all
their malice to bear upon me, the lowly one; but, О blessed martyrs, who truly
emulated the sufferings of Christ, deliver me from the harm they cause.
To the Martyrs: Refusing to bend their knees before graven images, the allpraised martyrs were cast, like the children of old, into the furnace of wounds; yet
through divine dew they were shown to be unburned, hymning Christ throughout
the ages.
Theotokion: By thy healing entreaties, О Virgin Birthgiver of God, show forth
as whole my wretched soul, which hath been weakened by the many assaults of
the evil one, that I may glorify thee throughout all ages.
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: Disdaining the golden image, the thrice-blessed children, *
beholding the immutable and living image of God, * chanted in the midst
of the flame: * Let all existing creation hymn the Lord * and supremely
exalt Him throughout all ages!
Thou didst create the angels who carry out Thy commandments with might, to
be likenesses of Thy goodness, О Word; and they help all the faithful to cry aloud:
Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all
ages!
The life of heaven, the ranks of the holy angels, didst Thou adorn with divine
virtues, О Christ, enlightening them; and they cry unto Thee: Let all existing
creation hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!
Rejoicing in splendor, without fail let us unfailingly chant the divine hymn of
the incorporeal ones; and, theologizing concerning the Master, let us cry out with
them in hymnody: Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and supremely exalt
Him throughout all ages!
Theotokion: The Righteous One, Who in wisdom setteth all things aright,
loved thee, as is meet, the immaculate and most pure Virgin, ineffably making His
abode within thee, О most holy Theotokos, and we glorify thee, saying: Let all
existing creation hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...”, and make prostrations.
ODE IX
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to
create Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating *
and Who took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, *
Him we faithful with one accord magnify in song.
Now is the time to act! Why dost thou mindlessly sleep in deep despondency?
Arise, and replenish thy lamp with tears! Hasten thou, for the Bridegroom
draweth night unto our souls! Tarry not, lest thou remain outside the divine doors.
О how awesome is Thy tribunal, which layeth bare before the angels the deeds
of all! О how grievous is the sentence which Thou shalt pronounce upon sinners!
Before the end, О Christ, deliver me therefore, granting me tears of conversion.
To the Martyrs: Marked with the divine blood of the Lamb and Shepherd, the
glorious and divine spiritual athletes rejoiced as they were slain like innocent
lambs; and in the heavens they now truly enlighten all the holy Church of the firstborn.
To the Martyrs: As ye were shown to be beacons of the radiance of the Sun, О
valiant spiritual athletes, ye illumine every soul with the beams of your sufferings,
dispelling all the darkness of deception; wherefore as is meet, with faith we call
you blessed.
Theotokion: Spare me, spare me, О Lord, when Thou shalt render judgment!
Condemn me not to the fire, neither rebuke me in Thine anger. The Virgin who
gave Thee birth entreats Thee, О Christ, as doth the multitude of the angels and
the company of martyrs.
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: Thou art all desire, Thou art all sweetness, * O Word of God, Son of
the Virgin, * God of gods, most holy Lord of the saints. * Wherefore, we
magnify Thee * and her who hath given birth to Thee.
The angels, appearing in garments of dazzling white, told Thy godly disciples
of Thy second coming, О Christ. With them, we all magnify Thee in theology.
(Twice)
As the Benefactor of all rational nature, in Thy surpassing goodness Thou
didst first create for Thyself a secondary radiance; wherefore, giving thanks, we all
magnify Thee.
Theotokion: Perceiving thy luminous virginity, and stricken with awe, the
divine supreme commander offered thee his salutation, О most pure one;
wherefore, we all magnify thee, the Theotokos.
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...”, and a prostration.
Litany: Let us complete ..., Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms.
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of compunction, in Tone II:
Mindful of the unseemly sins I have committed, I flee to Thy compassions,
emulating the publican, the harlot who wept, and the prodigal son; wherefore, I
fall down before Thee, О Merciful One, and say: Before Thou condemnest me, О
God, have pity and mercy upon me!
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons.
Overlook mine iniquities, О Lord Who wast born from the Virgin; and purify
my heart, making it a temple for Thy Holy Spirit. Turn not Thy face away from
me, О Thou Who art possessed of great and boundless mercy.
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our
hands do Thou guide aright.
To the Martyrs: Ye suffered for Christ even unto death, О passion-bearers and
martyrs. And though your souls are in the heavens, in the hand of God, your relics
are venerated throughout the whole world. The priests and all the people bow
down, and cry aloud, rejoicing: Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of
His saints.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
We have placed our trust in thee, О Theotokos. Let us not fall away from
hope, but save us from misfortunes, О helper of the perplexed, and set at naught
the counsels of the adversary. For thou art our salvation, О blessed one.
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia.
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal.
ON MONDAY MORNING
AT LITURGY
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone II:
We offer Thee the cry of the thief, and we pray: In Thy kingdom have mercy
upon us, О Savior!
Save me, О Lord my God, and cause me to share in the portion of those who
loved Thee with all their soul.
With fear all the armies of heaven serve Thee as God. By their supplications
save us.
To the Martyrs: With the sword of the Faith ye vanquished the hordes of the
enemy, О spiritual athletes, and were brought before God.
Glory ..., With the race of mankind the noetic ranks worship the simple
Trinity, the Godhead one in essence.
Now & ever ..., О most pure Lady who hast given birth unto God without
seed: Beseech Him, that we be saved.
On Monday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV:
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: He maketh His angels spirits, * and His ministers a flame of fire.
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been
magnified exceedingly.
Alleluia, in Tone V: Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him all ye His
hosts.
Verse: For He spake, and they came to be; He commanded, and they were
created.
Communion Verse: He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame
of fire. 