THURSDAY EVENING: TONE II
AT VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 3 Stichera of the Cross, in Tone II:
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness.
When Thou wast nailed to the Cross, О Savior, * the sun beheld and dimmed
its rays in fear of Thee, * and the veil of the temple * was rent in twain; * the earth
quaked, and the stones likewise * split asunder with trembling, * unable to bear
the sight of their Creator and God * willingly suffering unjustly upon the Tree, **
and reviled by men.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
Wholly cast down to the ground, * wholly wounded, * the most wicked
serpent was brought low by a strange fall * when Thou, О Lover of mankind, *
wast uplifted upon the Tree. * And Adam who before was condemned * was
loosed from the curse and became saved. * Wherefore, we also pray: ** Save us
all, О Compassionate One, and grant us Thy kingdom!
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
When the Cross was set up * and Thou wast pierced in the side with the spear,
* О Sinless Savior, * the sun hid itself, unable to bear the sight; * and when Thou
wast reviled, * the earth trembled, and the rocks split asunder in fear; * and all
creation cried out to Thee: * Glory be to Thy crucifixion whereby Thou hast
saved all, ** О Word and Lover of mankind!
Then the Stichera of the saint, from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these
Stichera of the Theotokos, in Tone II: in the same melody:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
Beholding Thee О Jesus, * lifted up upon the tree of the Cross, * she who
knew not wedlock wept and said: * “O my sweet Child, wherefore hast Thou
forsaken me * who alone gave Thee birth? * О unapproachable Light of the
beginningless Father, * hasten Thou and glorify Thyself, * that those who glorify
Thy divine sufferings ** may receive divine glory!”
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
When the Virgin beheld Life dying upon the Tree, * His side painfully pierced
by a spear, * she exclaimed, weeping: * “O my Son and God, * how hath the
ungrateful assembly rewarded Thee? * Woe is me! * My womb, which did not
suffer the pangs of childbirth, * is wracked with pain, ** beholding Thee suffering
for them, О Master!”
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
When the Maiden who knew not a man * beheld her Son taken down from the
Tree, * plainly laid upon the ground, * as a man bereft of breath, * she clasped
Him to her bosom * and, kissing His mouth and eyes, * exclaimed to Him in
wonder: * “How can I be unmoved when I see Thee now, ** bereft of voice, Who
givest life unto all?”
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb *
willingly led as a man to the slaughter, * she said, weeping: * “Dost Thou now
hasten to leave me childless who gave Thee birth O Christ,? * What is this that
Thou hast done, O Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify Thine
extreme goodness, * which is beyond understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of
mankind!”
Then, “О Joyous Light ...”, the Prokeimenon in Tone VI:
Prokeimenon: My help cometh from the Lord, * Who hath made heaven
and the earth.
Verse: I have lifted up mine eyes to the Mountains, from whence cometh
my help.
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Cross, in Tone II:
О Christ God my Savior, Who saved Peter in the sea, save me by the power of
the Cross, and have mercy on me.
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress,
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us.
They who ever enjoyed Thy gifts cried aloud, “Crucify Him!”; they who slew
the righteous ones asked that a malefactor be released unto them in place of the
Benefactor. But Thou didst keep silence, О Christ, enduring their savagery,
desiring to suffer and thus save us, in that Thou lovest mankind.
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.
To the Martyrs: Having hated the pleasures of life, the passion-bearers were
deemed worthy of the good things of heaven and have made their abode together
with the angels. By their prayers, О Lord, have mercy and save us.
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: When iniquitous men raised Thee, the Life of all, up upon
the Tree, О Savior, Thy pure and most immaculate Mother, standing forth and
lamenting, exclaimed: “O my sweet Child, light of mine eyes, woe is me! How hast
Thou suffered to be nailed to the Cross between two evildoers, О Thou Who hast
suspended the earth upon the waters?”
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion through Our
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal.
THURSDAY NIGHT: TONE II
AT COMPLINE
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos
ODE I
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh's whole
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified.
God chose thee as beauteous, all-comely, immaculate among women, and
made His abode within thine immaculate womb. Him do thou beseech, О allimmaculate one, that He deliver all who hymn thee from the disgrace of sins.
According to the psalm, thou dost stand as Queen at the right hand of the
King Who shone forth from thy womb, О pure one. Him do thou beseech, О allimmaculate one, that on the day of retribution He sets me to stand on the right
side.
Glory ..., О thou who hast given birth to the Rain of heaven, thou hast
renewed the nature of man which hath become dry because of unseemly deeds;
wherefore, I pray thee: Show forth the dry furrows of my soul to be fertile, О
Bride of God.
Now & ever ..., We who were slain by the tree of knowledge have been called
to life everlasting by Christ God, the Tree of life, Who blossomed forth from
thee, О pure one, in a manner transcending understanding. Entreat Him with
boldness, that our souls be saved.
ODE III
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a
lily * at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established.
Issuing forth from thy womb, О most pure one, the Creator clothed Himself
in me, a man, granting the raiment of incorruption to me who have been stripped
naked by my manifold evil deeds.
Thou hast given birth to the supremely honored Word of God, О Lady. Him
do thou earnestly beseech, that He have pity on my lowly soul, which is beset by
the indignity of pleasures.
Glory ..., Heal thou the wounds of my soul, О most pure one, and with thine
effective therapy cure my lowly heart, which hath been afflicted by the venom of
the serpent.
Now & ever ..., As thou hast boldness before thy Son, О Lady and Mother,
beg help for thine oppressed people and cast down the arrogance of the
iniquitous.
ODE IV
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor
as an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the
whole man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!
Let fall upon me a drop of compunction, О Lady, easing all the burning heat
of my heart and dispelling my grief and the buffeting assaults.
Disdain me not, who has been pierced by the sword of pleasure and lie in my
wounds, О most pure one, but heal me with the spear and blood of thy crucified
Son and our God.
Glory ..., О thou who hast been enriched by all the edification of the Master,
grant divine grace unto me who am grievously impoverished, that I may magnify
thee as my good helper, О all-immaculate one.
Now & ever ..., Christ, the Effulgence of the Father, shone forth from thy
womb, О Maiden who knewest not wedlock, and, crucified, hath enlightened the
whole world, destroying the darkness of the demons.
ODE V
Irmos: O Christ God Thou art a mediator between God and man; * for by
Thee, O Master, * we have been led from the night of ignorance, * to Thy
Father, the Source of light.
О most pure one who hast given birth to the Way of life, direct me not to the
narrow path, for unknowingly I have stumbled headlong into a trackless waste and
the brink of grievous falls.
Having mindlessly estranged myself from the understanding of God, I have
lived prodigally, lost in the far country of the passions; yet, having brought me
back, О pure Virgin, save me by thy consolation.
Glory ..., With thy living waters give drink to thy servant who burns with the
flame of sin and am consumed by the assaults of the demons, О most pure Virgin
Mother.
Now & ever ..., Lo! thou didst have Christ God in thy womb in a manner past
all telling, О most pure Theotokos, as Isaiah proclaimed, and thou hast given birth
to Him supra-naturally, О Birthgiver of God.
ODE VI
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God.
Let me not be shown to be a delight for the demons at the judgment which is
to come, О Lady, but directing upon me a gaze of reconciliation, entreat the
Judge, thy Son.
Having driven Thee away with my wicked thoughts and mine impure acts, О
Lord, I bring before Thee Thy Mother to make supplication. Have pity and save
me!
Glory ..., From condemnation, О Lady, deliver me who have condemned
myself through my transgressions, for thou hast given birth to the Judge and God
of all, О all-hymned one.
Now & ever ..., Beseech Jesus the Savior to Whom thou hast given birth
supra-naturally in the flesh, О most pure Virgin Mother, that thy servants be
delivered from misfortunes.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone II:
Spec. Mel.: “As thou art full of loving-kindness ...”:
Thy Virgin Mother, beholding Thee, О Christ, stretched out dead upon the
Tree, said, weeping bitterly: “O my Son, what is this strange mystery? How is it
that Thou Who grantest life everlasting unto all dost of Thine own will die a
shameful death upon the Cross?”
ODE VII
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; *
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He
is blessed and supremely exalted.
As thou art my strength and song, my salvation, firm help and invincible
bulwark, О Lady, vanquish the demons which war against me, ever seeking to slay
me.
Giving flesh to God from thy virginal blood, О Virgin, thou hast deified
mankind; wherefore, I pray thee: by thy prayers deliver me, who have been defiled
by the passions and corrupted by the wiles of the enemy.
Glory ..., The furnace prefigured thy birthgiving, О all-immaculate one, for it
did not consume the children, just as the unbearable Fire did not consume thy
womb. Wherefore, we entreat thee: Deliver thy servants from eternal fire.
Now & ever ..., Remaining a virgin, thou alone didst show forth a most pure
conception and an incorrupt birthgiving, for thou didst conceive Christ, Who is
God over all and Who became a man, О pure one, for the salvation and
deliverance of the faithful.
ODE VIII
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful,
who chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!
Be zealous for good works, О my soul, withdrawing from evils with care for
godly acts, having the Theotokos praying for thee, the unashamed helper of all, in
that she is merciful and loving.
Thou hast broken the bonds of men’s ancient condemnation; wherefore, I
beseech thee, O Birthgiver of God: Loose thou all the evil bonds of my heart,
binding me with the divine love of the Creator, О most pure one.
Glory ..., Having given birth to the Effulgence of the Father’s glory, О
Theotokos, illumine my heart, which hath become downcast because of the
infamy of my transgressions, and show me forth to share in everlasting glory, that
I may glorify thee with faith.
Now & ever ..., Through thee, О Birthgiver of God, hath the true Sun of
righteousness been revealed to us, illumining all things with rays of divinity. Him,
the Most High incarnate, do we hymn.
ODE IX
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath
appeared to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and
to gather the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we
magnify
Having tasted of the food mingled with death, Adam was seized by bitterness
through the tree; but thy Son Who was nailed to the Tree, О most pure one, hath
poured forth the sweetness of immortality. Wherefore, we praise thee*
Thou art the Queen, having in a manner past all telling given birth to Christ,
the King and Lord, Who hath destroyed the realm of death. Him do thou
earnestly entreat, О Maiden, that He grant the kingdom on high unto all who
honor thee.
Glory ..., As thou art the Mother of the Good One and art wholly good, bless
thou my lowly heart, which is oppressed by attacks of pleasure, and lead me
through the portals of good unto repentance.
Now & ever ..., Thou Who wast suspended aloft, dead, upon the Cross hast
therewith slain the serpent. Wherefore, I cry out to Thee: Have mercy, О Word,
upon my soul which hath been slain by my wicked deeds, and give life to it by the
prayers of her who gave birth to Thee.
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ...,
And the rest as usual.
ON FRIDAY MORNING: TONE II
AT MATINS
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,
the Sessional hymns of the Cross, in Tone II:
Thou didst work salvation in the midst of the earth, О Christ God, and on the
Cross didst stretch out Thy most pure hands, gathering to Thee all the nations,
who cry: Glory to Thee, О Lord!
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet, *
for He is holy.
Just as the enemy made Adam captive by the fruit of the tree, so didst Thou
Thyself make the enemy captive by the tree of the Cross and Thy suffering, О
Lord; for Thou camest as the Second Adam for this purpose: to seek out the lost
and bring life to the dead. Glory be to Thee, О Lord!
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee, O Christ, stretched dead upon the tree, *
Thy virgin Mother cried out with bitter tears: * O my son, what is this fearful
mystery? * How dost Thou give eternal life to all, ** and yet suffer willingly a
shameful death upon the Cross?
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone II:
The life-creating Cross of Thy goodness, which Thou hast given unto us, the
unworthy, O Lord, do we offer unto Thee in supplication: Save Thy city, granting
it peace for the sake of the Theotokos, О Thou Who alone lovest mankind.
Verse: God is our King before the ages; * He hath wrought salvation in the
midst of the earth.
We bow down before Thy most pure image, О Good One, asking forgiveness
for our transgressions, О Christ God; for of Thine own will Thou wast wellpleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh, that Thou mightest deliver that which
Thou didst create from slavery to the enemy. Wherefore, we cry out to Thee in
thanksgiving: О our Savior, Thou hast filled all with joy when Thou camest to
save the world!
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.
To the Martyrs: Having Thee Who clothed the sky in clouds as their vesture in
the world, the saints endured torments at the hands of the iniquitous, and
abolished the deception of idolatry. By their supplications free us also from the
invisible foe, О Savior, and save us.
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: Standing beside Thy Cross, * she who gave birth to thee
without seed * could not endure seeing Thee unjustly suffering, * and cried aloud
to Thee, * weeping and lamenting: * ‘O my sweetest son, how dost Thou suffer, *
though Thou art dispassionate by nature? * I sing the praises of Thine extreme
and compassionate goodness.
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone II:
Like the thief do I confess and cry out to Thee, O Good One: Remember me,
О Lord, in Thy kingdom! Reckon me with him, О Thou Who didst willingly
accept sufferings for our sake.
О good Shepherd, Who hast enlightened mortals and summoned sinners by
the Cross, cut me not off from Thy flock, but seek me out who am lost, О
Master, and number me among Thy sheep, О Thou Who alone art good and the
Lover of mankind.
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: Guarded by the precious Cross of thy son, * O pure Lady
Theotokos, * we easily turn away all the assaults of the enemy! * Therefore we
rightly call thee blessed, * for thou art the mother of light ** and the only hope of
our souls!
Canon of the precious & life-creating Cross, the acrostic whereof is “When
the Cross was planted, the deception of the demons fell”, the composition
of Joseph, in Tone II:
ODE I
Irmos: Traversing dryshod the impassible, peculiar path in the sea, * Israel
the chosen cried aloud: * Let us chant unto the Lord, * for He hath been
glorified!
Thou didst accept crucifixion, being ignominiously pierced with nails, О
Word, desiring to honor all those who glorify Thy voluntary sufferings.
Thou didst stretch out Thy hands upon the Cross, О Savior Who stretched
out the sky like a skin, and didst thereby embrace the nations and those who
glorify Thy voluntary sufferings.
To the Martyrs: Shouldering their cross, the passion-bearers earnestly followed
the crucified Christ, conforming themselves to His divine sufferings.
To the Martyrs: Beholding your sufferings, the angelic hosts sang, but the
multitude of the demons lamented, О victorious martyrs who gaze upon God.
Theotokion: The word of the honorable prophet hath been fulfilled, for a
sword pierced thy heart, О Lady, when thou didst see thy Son nailed to the Cross.
Another canon, of the Most Holy Theotokos, in Tone II:
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought
up out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.
О Maiden, who hast given birth to the Source of dispassion, heal me who am
wounded by the passions, and rescue me from the everlasting fire, О thou who
alone art full of divine joy.
Deliver me from bodily illness, and cure the unseemly passions of my soul,
and rescue me from everlasting fire, О thou who alone art full of the grace of
God.
I flee now beneath thy goodness, О most pure Virgin Mother: Deliver thy
servant from pain of soul, from spiritually corrupting passions and everlasting fire.
О Lady, thou art my fervent sanctuary: unto thee do I flee and am saved, and
acquire salvation of soul. For thou canst save all, in that thou art the Mother of
God.
ODE III
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I
sing: * There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than
Thee, O Lord.
Hanging upon the Tree, the incorrupt Grapes: Jesus, the Redeemer of our
souls: exuded the divine sweetness which gladdeneth the hearts of all and which
by grace taketh away the drunkenness of evil.
Of Thine own will Thou wast raised up upon the Tree, О Jesus, and didst foil
all the wicked schemes of the devil; and didst raise up mankind who had fallen
into destruction through their depraved minds, О greatly Merciful One.
To the Martyrs: Enkindled by the fire of divine love, the valiant ones were
undaunted by the fire and unafraid of death, trusting that they would receive gifts
of immortality, endless joy and never-waning light.
To the Martyrs: Having dyed a most splendid robe in their own blood and
clothed themselves therein, and holding the divine Cross in their hands like a
scepter, the passion-bearers ever reign with the Lord.
Theotokion: The ranks of incorporeal beings honor thee, for thou, О Maiden
Bride of God, hast given birth to the incarnate Master Who by the Tree hath
released all who were bound, and thereby bound the faithful to His love.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith ...,
Unto the King, Who is without beginning and Who had received flesh from
thee, О Virgin Mother, thou hast given birth. Entreat Him as the Lover of
mankind, that He save thy servant from all the tribulations and damnation which
is to come.
Resolve the perplexity of my heart, heal my wounds and rid me of festering
corruption by thy divine power; and grant me a stream of compunction, О thou
who hast given birth to the Source of everlasting life.
O Birthgiver of God, heal my soul, which hath become sick through
despondency and the assaults of the demons; grant tears of repentance to my
heart, and plant therein the fear of my Master, О most pure one.
Having wasted my life in slothfulness and defiled my heart with the passions, I
come to thee in compunction of soul, О Lady, and pray: Have pity and save me,
making me steadfast by models of repentance.
ODE IV
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor
as an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the
whole man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!
Thou wast suspended upon the Tree, О Almighty, Who suspended the earth
upon the waters; and, pierced in the side by a spear, Thou didst pour forth blood
and water for the salvation of all.
When Thy side was pierced, it healed my sickness; when thou wast smitten on
the cheek by the hand of man, I received freedom; and by Thy tasting of gall, О
Christ, we have been delivered from the sweet taste of the fruit in Eden.
To the Martyrs: Having been lashed by the whips of the deceiving serpent, ye
heal the stripes of our hearts, ever pouring forth grace from the wellsprings of the
Savior, О divine martyrs.
To the Martyrs: Bloodied by your wounds, stretched out upon crosses, and
maimed, ye dealt a blow to the whole body of the enemy, О all-honored Godseeing passion-bearers.
Theotokion: The Most High became incarnate from thy most pure blood; and
beholding Him, unjustly suspended upon the Tree, О most pure one, thou didst
groan, weeping, and magnifying His tender compassion.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.
I truly hymn thee, О all-hymned one, who hast supra-naturally given birth to
the all-hymned Word of God; and I pray: Heal the pangs of my lowly soul, and
deliver me from grievous condemnation.
Rain down upon us the riches of thy mercy, О Virgin, ending our infirmities
and loosing the divers passions of our souls; and free my heart from the bonds of
sin and from many pangs.
I have defiled my soul with the passions; but do thou, who didst become the
most pure dwelling-place of the Most pure One, О Birthgiver of God, cleanse me,
guiding me to the light of repentance and rescuing me from the fire which is to
come.
Enlighten my mind, О most pure Lady, I pray thee; and still the waves of my
passion-plagued heart, putting down carnal desires and leading me to the divine
haven.
ODE V
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: The burning Ember was revealed to Isaiah, * and the Sun hath
shone forth from the Virgin's womb, * granting the enlightenment of the
knowledge of God * to those who in darkness have gone astray.
Having accepted the Cross in Thy tender compassion, О Master, Thou didst
draw me forth from the abyss of evils, and by sitting with the Father Thou didst
honor me, who of mine own will have become dishonored.
Crowned with thorns, О Word who dost crown the whole world with fauna,
Thou dost hew down the thorns of my passions at the root, planting the
understanding of Thee within me.
To the Martyrs: Arrayed of your own will in the strength of your weakness, О
holy martyrs, fortified, ye thereby destroyed the might of the demons.
To the Martyrs: Having struggled greatly upon the earth, О saints, ye have
found great glory in the heavens, and deliver from great misfortunes us who
honor you.
Theotokion: He Who in the heavens is divinely borne upon the shoulders of
the cherubim, and Who sat upon thine arm, О most pure one, truly delivered all
from corruption when He was crucified.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness
of sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with
Thy radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee.
О all-immaculate Lady Theotokos, who hast given birth to the hypostatic Life
of all, enliven me who have been slain by the assaults and pursuit of the deceiver,
that I may piously hymn thee, the all-hymned one.
As the Virgin Mother of the Lamb and Shepherd, shepherd me whose conduct
is unlawful, and grant that on the day of judgment I may be reckoned with the
lambs on the right hand of God, that I may hymn thy saving grace.
By thy supplications, О Maiden, deliver me, I pray, from the darkness of the
passions, from temptations caused by the assaults of the alien one, and from the
everlasting torments which await sinners.
О Bride of God, in whom dwelt the one divine Word Who enlighteneth the
whole world: Shine upon me the radiance of true repentance, and illumine me
with beams of salvation, dispelling the darkness of my passions by thine
intercessions, I pray.
ODE VI
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: O Master, hearkening unto the sound of entreaties * from a soul in
pain, * do Thou deliver me from my grievous sins, * for Thou alone art the
Cause of our salvation.
Having given Thy shoulders over to stripes, Thy cheek to buffeting, and Thy
face to spitting, О Savior, Thou didst save me who have sinned greatly against
Thee in knowledge and in ignorance.
Thou wast led like a lamb to the slaughter, О Christ my God, leading back to
life those who had been slain by the poisonous bite of the noetic wolf. Glory to
Thy crucifixion!
To the Martyrs: Observing the laws of the Master, the martyrs utterly rejected
the iniquitous counsel of the violators of the law; and, dying, they received the life
which is to come.
To the Martyrs: Having arrayed yourselves, rejoicing, against the adverse
princes, О saints, ye vanquished them with the weaponry of God, and have
received from Him crowns of victory.
Theotokion: That He might deify mankind, О Virgin, God was born from
thee, and crucified, and tasted death, by His Cross slaying him who of old brought
death upon me.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God.
I flee now unto thee, О all-hymned one. Save and preserve me by thy
supplications; for whatsoever thou desirest, thou canst do, in that thou art the
Mother of Him Who strengtheneth all.
О Virgin Theotokos, save thy servant, who am tempest-tossed by the storm of
griefs, and am overwhelmed by the battering of threefold waves.
Grant thy loving-kindness unto me who am an object of pitilessness and
malice; and rescue me from the retribution which lieth before me and from
everlasting fire.
О all-immaculate one who having conceived, hast given birth to the most pure
Lamb Who taketh away the sins of the world, cease not to pray to Him, that He
grant me the forgiveness of my sins.
ODE VII
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; *
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He
is blessed and supremely exalted.
When Thou wast lifted up upon the Cross, О Word Who art the resurrection
and uplifting of all, Thou didst raise me up who had fallen through disobedience;
casting down the adversary who caused me to fall, and showing him to be wholly
impotent and dead. Glory to Thy dominion!
By Thy nails Thou didst transfix the sins of our forefather; and, beaten with
the reed, thou didst sign a writ of emancipation for all mankind. Glory be to Thy
suffering, whereby we have been delivered from the darkness of the passions!
To the Martyrs: The right victorious great martyrs of Christ were
dismembered by the hands of vile murderers, yet in spirit they remained
inseparable from God, felling and slaying the deceiving enemy with the sword of
valor.
To the Martyrs: Possessed of the invincible might of the crucified Christ, the
invincible army utterly destroyed the army of perdition; and, having suffered, they
received crowns of victory and a blessed life which cannot be destroyed.
Theotokion: О Virgin, thou wast shown to be the animate palace of the King
and the fiery throne, on which, having sat, He raised all up from the primal fall
and honored them by sitting with the Father.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant ...,
О pure one, who for us hast given birth to the hypostatic Life Who clearly
destroyed death by His death, slay thou the passions of my soul, and grant me a
fountain of tears, that I may ever glorify thee.
Hope unashamed, a certain trust, an unassailable rampart, protection and
helper, О all-immaculate one, be thou unto me who set my hope on thee; and
guide me to the light of repentance and compunction, О pure one.
That thy servant may be delivered from all the evil of the demons, from grief
and damnation, and from everlasting fire, entreat thy Son, that I may ever glorify
thee with faith.
Thou alone hast been shown to be the one whose conception was most pure
and whose birthgiving was incorrupt, such that thou didst remain a virgin; for
thou didst conceive Christ, the God of all, Who became a man, О pure one, for
the salvation and deliverance of the faithful.
ODE VIII
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: Disdaining the golden image, the thrice-blessed children, *
beholding the immutable and living image of God, * chanted in the midst
of the flame: * Let all existing creation hymn the Lord * and supremely
exalt Him throughout all ages!
Disobedient men, who lacking compunction wrought all manner of iniquities,
raised up upon the Tree between two malefactors Thee, Who dost justify sinners,
crucifying Thee, О Compassionate One; but all creation glorifieth Thee as Lord
and Master, hymning Thy long-suffering.
Nailed to the Tree, Thou didst bloody Thy fingers, О Christ, and Thou didst
bring an end to the blood sacrificed of old to the demons unto the damnation of
those who offered it up. Wherefore, all creation glorifieth Thee, hymning Thy love
for mankind, О God of all.
To the Martyrs: The immeasurable quantity of your blood quenched the fire of
ungodliness and did away with the delusion of pagan polytheism, О saints;
illumining all the faithful, who chant: Let all creation hymn the Lord and
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!
Theotokion: The unblemished Ewe-lamb, the adornment of the prophets and
martyrs, beholding Thee lifted up upon the Tree like a lamb, О Word Who art
without beginning, wept bitterly and said: “Let all existing creation hymn the Lord
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!”
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew
children, * and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and
supremely exalt as Lord throughout all ages.
О most pure Virgin, refuge and helper of Christians, disdain me not who am
surrounded by evils and am ever beset by misfortunes and the many onslaughts of
the wicked demons.
Forget not the cry of those who pray to thee, О awesome intercessor, but by
thine intercessions rescue them from all pain and every threat; for thy maternal
supplications incline God to mercy.
Still now the tempest of my passions, О pure and blessed Maiden, and
vanquish all the incorporeal foes who pitilessly assail my poverty, that I may hymn
thee with faith.
At the hour of mine end, О only Birthgiver of God, intercessor for the
faithful, rescue me from the furnace of temptations, the flame of sins and the fire
of the passions, from Gehenna and the assaults of the demons.
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...”, and make prostrations.
ODE IX
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: Every tongue is at a loss to praise thee as is due: * even a spirit from
the world above is filled with dizziness, * when it seeketh to sing thy
praises, O Theotokos. * But since thou art good, accept our faith: * Thou
knowest well our love inspired by God, * for thou art the Protector of
Christians and we magnify thee.
Of old, Isaac was bound, that he might provide an image of Thy suffering; and
as a symbol of remission Abraham freed the lamb who was caught in the thicket,
releasing a truly involuntary sacrifice. But Thou wast willingly sacrificed, Thou
didst thereby free us from evils.
Glory to Thy loving-kindness, О only loving Lord Christ, Who art comely in
beauty more than the sons of men, yet wast bereft of form and beauty when Thou
wast hung upon the tree of the Cross, transforming the ugliness of the whole race
of mankind into beauty!
To the Martyrs: Ye were shown to be divine inhabitants of the heavenly Sion
and fellow citizens equal in honor with the angels, О martyrs; and ye illumine with
splendor the Church of the firstborn, О saints, shining with divine light, and
wearing your torments as crowns.
To the Martyrs: О holy martyrs and beloved friends of the Lord Who most
gloriously loved you: Deliver me from the friendship of the deceiver, which is of
the flesh; and ask that sanctification, enlightenment and the remission of
transgressions be given to all who keep your memory.
Theotokion: The beauty of the heavenly spheres left their usual course when
they beheld Thee, the Sun of righteousness, willingly lifted up upon the Cross; and
with the virginal disciple the Virgin exclaimed, weeping and crying aloud: “Woe is
me! What is this strange sight?”
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath
appeared to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and
to gather the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we
magnify
In a manner transcending understanding and all telling thou hast given birth
to the only greatly merciful Lord and Lover of mankind. Him do thou beseech, О
Virgin, that at the dread hour of judgment He deliver thy servant from everlasting
fire.
О Bride of God, from heaven grant remission of evil unto us who hymn thee,
who glorify thee with faith, and ever hasten to thy divine protection; and deliver
us from the despotic passions, from torments and judgment.
The fruit of sin which brought death upon me was beautiful to behold, yet
most bitter to taste; yet because I ate of it to satiety, I await the dread judgment.
But rescue me therefore, О most holy Virgin Mother.
In that thou didst bear the Good One and art wholly good, О most pure one,
bless my lowly heart, which hath been restrained by the bars of pleasures; and lead
me through the beautiful doors of repentance.
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...”, and a prostration.
Litany: Let us complete ..., Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms.
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Cross, in Tone II:
О Christ God, Thou hast shown the tree of Thy Cross to be a tree of life for
us who believe on Thee; and thereby hast Thou abolished the dominion of death
and brought life unto us who have been slain by sin. Wherefore, we cry out to
Thee: О Lord, Benefactor of all, glory be to Thee!
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons.
Having willingly impoverished Thyself for the sake of Adam’s poverty, О
Christ God, Thou didst come to earth and become incarnate from the Virgin; and
accepted crucifixion, that Thou mightest free us from slavery to the enemy. Glory
be to Thee, О Lord!
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our
hands do Thou guide aright.
To the Martyrs: Having suffered like Christ even unto death, О passionbearing martyrs, your souls are in heaven, in the hand of God, and your relics are
venerated throughout the world. The priests bow down, and all of us, the people,
cry aloud, rejoicing: Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints!
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb *
willingly led as a man to the slaughter, * she said, weeping: * “Dost Thou now
hasten to leave me childless who gave Thee birth O Christ,? * What is this that
Thou hast done, O Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify Thine
extreme goodness, * which is beyond understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of
mankind!”
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia.
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal.
ON FRIDAY MORNING: TONE II
AT LITURGY
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone II:
We offer Thee the cry of the thief, and we pray: In Thy kingdom have mercy
upon us, О Savior!
Thou didst uproot the thorns of evil when of Thine own will Thou didst wear
the crown of thorns, О long-suffering Master.
When Thou wast crucified on Golgotha, О Sinless One, Thou didst crush the
head of the serpent and save all mankind.
To the Martyrs: Broken, О martyrs, ye broke all the power of the enemy and
have received crowns of victory.
Glory ..., Enlightened by the sprinkling of the divine Blood, we, the faithful,
honor the one Godhead in three Hypostases.
Now & ever ..., Beholding Christ hanging like a lamb upon the Tree, the allimmaculate one, lamenting and weeping, magnified Him.
On Friday, the Prokeimenon in Tone VII:
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the
footstool of His feet, for He is holy.
Verse: The Lord is King, let the peoples rage.
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast
purchased from the beginning.
Verse: God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the
midst of the earth.
Communion Verse: Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth,
O God.