TONE THREE
ON SATURDAY EVENING
AT LITTLE VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 4 Stichera:
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone III:
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
By Thy Cross, O Christ our Savior, * the dominion of death hath been
abolished, * the devil’s deception hath been dispelled, * while mankind, saved by
faith, ** each evening offers hymns unto Thee.
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
By Thy Cross, O Christ our Savior, * the dominion of death hath been
abolished, * the devil’s deception hath been dispelled, * while mankind, saved by
faith, ** each evening offers hymns unto Thee.
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
By Thy Resurrection, O Lord, * the universe hath been filled with light * and
Paradise hath been opened again, * while all creation, singing Thy praise, ** each
evening offers hymns unto Thee.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
I glorify the power of the Father and the Son, * and I praise the authority of
the Holy Spirit, * undivided, uncreated Godhead, * consubstantial Trinity, ** that
reigneth from ages to ages.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:
O Greatest wonder: * a Virgin today giveth birth, * and that which is born is
God before the ages. * Having revealed Thine ineffable birthgiving, * clearly that
which was accomplished was beyond nature. * O fearsome Mystery! * What was
apprehended remaineth ineffable, * and that which was contemplated remaineth
incomprehensible. * Blessed art thou, O most pure Maiden, * daughter of Adam
the earthborn, * and revealed as the Mother of the Most High. ** beseech Him
that our souls be saved.
Then “O Joyous Light ...”:
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...”, with its verses.
After “Vouchsafe O Lord ...”: 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Theotokos, in Tone III:
By Thy passion, O Christ, * Thou didst darken the sun, * and by the light of
Thy Resurrection * Thou hast made the whole universe radiant. * We beseech
Thee to accept our evening hymn, ** O Lover of mankind.
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation.
O Pure Virgin, * we know thee to be the spiritual Ark * who for us bore the
Tablets written by God, * the Lawgiver and Creator. ** Intercede with Him that
our souls may be saved.
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear; * and forget
thine own people and thy father’s house.
God the Word, who is by nature beyond understanding, * and who dwelt in
thy womb taking flesh from thee, * hath revealed thee to be Heaven upon earth,
O pure Virgin, * wherefore thou, who knewest not wedlock, ** doth bedew all
with immortal dew.
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance.
By thine intercessions we have gained salvation, * because through them, O
Virgin, we ever escape from dangers * and the tempests of temptations, *
wherefore we entreat thee, ** cease not to intercede on our behalf, that our souls
may be saved.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
Through thee, O Mary most pure, * we have come to know regeneration * and
a second life for our human nature: * for the Maker of creation who hath been
kneaded within thy womb * and who hath raised us up from death and Hades, *
hath granted us eternal life, * wherefore we cry out to thee, O Ever-virgin; *
‘Rejoice!, thou who hast joined together things below with those of heaven. *
Rejoice!, the hope of all the ends of the earth, * our protection and intercession. *
Rejoice!, thou who by the Resurrection of thy Son * maketh all things radiant **
granting unto the world His great mercy’.
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion. Then:
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone III:
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath wrought
might with His arm. * trampling down death by death; * becoming the first-born
of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting the world
great mercy.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
And the Dismissal.
AT GREAT VESPERS
On “Lord I have cried ...”, 10 Stichera: 7 Resurrection Stichera and 3 of the
Saint of the day, or 4 and 6 if the Menaion service is of Polyeleos rank.
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone III:
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.
By Thy Cross, O Christ our Savior, * the dominion of death hath been
abolished, * the devil’s deception hath been dispelled, * while mankind, saved by
faith, ** each evening offers hymns unto Thee.
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward
me.
By Thy Resurrection, O Lord, * the universe hath been filled with light * and
Paradise hath been opened again, * while all creation, singing Thy praise, ** each
evening offers hymns unto Thee.
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear
my voice.
I glorify the power of the Father and the Son, * and I praise the authority of
the Holy Spirit, * undivided, uncreated Godhead, * consubstantial Trinity, ** that
reigneth from ages to ages.
Other Stichera, by Anatolius:
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication.
We worship Thy precious Cross, O Christ, * and we praise and glorify Thy
Resurrection, ** for by Thy wounds we have all been healed.
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness.
We praise the Savior who took flesh from the Virgin; * for he was crucified for
us and arose on the third day, ** granting unto us His great mercy.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my
soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
Descending down unto those in Hades, * Christ proclaimed the good tidings,
exclaiming, * ‘Be of good cheer; for now I have conquered! * I am the
Resurrection; * I shall raise you up, ** abolishing the gates of death’.
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
We who stand unworthily in Thy most pure house * chant an evening hymn, *
crying from the depths, * ‘O Christ God, who hath enlightened the world by Thy
Resurrection on the third day, ** deliver Thy people from the hand of Thine
enemies, O Lover of mankind’.
Then the Stichera from the Menaion, with the following Verses:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
Glory from the Menaion, if appointed otherwise:
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion Dogmatic:
How can we, O all-honored one, * not marvel at thine Offspring? * who is
both God and man. * For without knowing a man, O all-immaculate One, *
without a father thou hast given birth to a Son in the flesh, * who without a
mother was begotten from the Father before all ages, * yet in no way undergoing
change, fusion or separation, * but preserving fully the characteristics of both
natures. * Wherefore, O Sovereign Lady, and Virgin Mother, * beseech Him to
save the souls of those ** who with Orthodox faith confess thee to be the true
Theotokos.
After the Entrance and “O Joyous Light ...”,
Saturday Vespers Prokeimenon, in Tone VI:
The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty.
Verse: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself.
Verse: For He established the universe which shall not be shaken.
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone III:
By Thy passion, O Christ, * Thou didst darken the sun, * and by the light of
Thy Resurrection * Thou hast made the whole universe radiant. * We beseech
Thee to accept our evening hymn, ** O Lover of mankind.
Verse: The Lord is King: He is clothed with majesty. * The Lord is clothed
with strength and He hath girt Himself.
O Gracious Lord, Thy life-bearing Rising hath enlightened the world, * and
reclaimed Thine own fashioned after Thine image, * which had become corrupt. *
And so, delivered from the curse of Adam, we cry aloud, ** ‘O All-powerful Lord,
glory be to Thee!’
Verse: For He established the universe * which shall not be shaken.
Howbeit, as God Thou art unchangeable, * yet by Thy suffering Thou hast
undergone change in the flesh, * and creation, unable to bear seeing Thee hanging
upon a cross, * was shaken with fear, * groaning as it sang the praise of Thy longsuffering; * and having descended into Hades, Thou didst arise on the third day,
** granting to the world life and great mercy.
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, * O Lord, unto length of days.
In order to ransom our race from death, O Christ, * Thou didst suffer death; *
and arising on the third day from the dead * Thou hast raised with Thyself those
who acknowledged Thee as God, * and Thou hast enlightened the world. ** O
Lord, glory be to Thee!
Glory from the Menaion, if appointed, otherwise:
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
By the will of the Father and without seed * thou didst conceive through the
divine Spirit the Son of God * Who hath existed from the Father without a
mother from before the ages, * and Who for our sake came forth from Thee in
the flesh without a father, * and Him hast thou suckled as a babe. * Wherefore,
cease not to beseech Him, ** that our souls be delivered from tribulations.
Now Master, Trisagion. Then:
Tone IV:
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, **
for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice)
Note: If it is a regular Sunday Vigil, we chant “O Theotokos and Virgin ...”
(Thrice). If it is one of the 12 great feasts, we chant the Troparion of the feast
(Thrice). If it is a Sunday coinciding with some other feast, we chant “O
Theotokos and Virgin ...”, (Twice), and the Troparion of the Feast (Once).
And the Dismissal.
If a Vigil is not served, we chant (Once):
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone III:
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath wrought
might with His arm. * trampling down death by death; * becoming the first-born
of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting the world
great mercy.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., the Resurrection Theotokion, in Tone III:
We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O Virgin
Theotokos; * for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross in the
flesh * He had received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in that He
is the Lover of mankind.
SATURDAY NIGHT: TONE III
AT COMPLINE
The priest saith: Blessed is our God..., and we respond: Amen. Glory to Thee,
our God, glory to Thee. О heavenly King..., Trisagion through Our Father. Lord,
have mercy (12 times). Glory..., Now & ever... О come, let us worship... (Thrice).
Psalm 50 (Have mercy on me, О God...); Psalm 69 (O God, be attentive unto
helping me...); and Psalm 142 (О Lord, hear my prayer...). Then, Glory to God in
the highest..., and the Symbol of Faith (I believe in one God...).
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos, in Tone III
ODE I
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree,
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified.
With pure hymns, О most pure Bride of God, we, the faithful, crown thee as
her who, through the divine Spirit and at the good pleasure of the Father, wast
revealed to be the Mother of God; and with the archangel we greet thee with
hymns, unto our salvation.
Of old, Eve was formed from the side of Adam by God’s creative action, and
Christ, Who is our God, appeared out of the womb of the Theotokos and became
immutably man: the Pre-eternal came under time.
Glory ..., He Who is our God condemned the womb of Eve to give birth amid
grief and pain, yet He made His abode within thy womb, appeared in the flesh in a
manner past all telling, and loosed the debt of our first mother.
Now & ever ..., Having fallen, heavy laden, into the abyss of despair, О
Birthgiver of God, we earnestly cry out to thee: О Lady, help us who are
drowning because of our deeds of wicked transgression! For thee alone do we
have as our hope after God.
ODE III
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in
Thy love.
The staff of Aaron, which blossomed forth without being watered, showed
thee forth, О most pure Theotokos, who without seed hast given birth to God
Who became incarnate without undergoing change.
In the Spirit, О most pure one, the prophet foresaw thee as a lampstand
bearing the divine Fire, conveying sweet fragrance and life everlasting to those in
the world.
Glory ..., Let us approach the Archangel Gabriel, in hymns declaring to the
Theotokos: Rejoice! for through thee the curse of our first parents’ condemnation
hath been loosed!
Now & ever ..., Having thee as a bulwark of salvation, О most holy
Theotokos, we sinners are saved. О Lady, disdain not, neither spurn thou our
supplications!
ODE IV
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’
Of old, Habbakuk, perceiving thee with divine vision, О most pure one,
proclaimed thee to be the noetic mountain, the tabernacle of the virtues, for the
Word Who came forth from the south received flesh from thee.
In the Spirit Daniel beheld thee as a great and unquarried mountain, revealing
the purity of thy virginity as remaining inviolate, О Lady, from whom Christ the
Word, the Rock, was cut, casting down the falsehood of idolatry.
Glory ..., David foretold thee to be a wondrous and rich mountain; for the
only-begotten Son of the Father was well-pleased to make His abode within thee,
in the flesh. Wherefore, in the Spirit we cry out to thee: Rejoice!
Now & ever ..., As thou art the wholly good and fervent intercessor for the
sinful and lowly, О most pure Lady and Birthgiver of God, save Thy servants
from misfortunes, sorrows and sins.
ODE V
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high *
borne aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have
foreseen God made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the
King of peace.’
The Virgin Mary, the rod of Jesse, without seed, through the divine Spirit of
the Father, put forth the never-fading Blossom of the beginningless God, Who
hath dominion over the mighty kingdoms of the nations, and upon Whom the
gentiles set their hope.
Taking flesh from thee, О Theotokos, the Prince of peace hath come to reign
upon the throne of David. О the wonder! He hath shown thee to be the Queen
who gave birth to Him Who set warfare at naught, striking down the princes of
Moab.
Glory ..., Revealing thine immaculate goodness, through which Christ was clad
in the flesh without seed, О Virgin, Isaiah cried out, exclaiming: The Lord of glory
cometh upon a light cloud, and dispelling the darkness of delusion, He hath
bestowed light upon us!
Now & ever ..., Having conceived by the Holy Spirit the Word Who is
consubstantial with the Father, О Virgin, thou hast given birth to Him in two
natures, perfect God and perfect man. His manifestation in the flesh do we honor
with faith.
ODE VI
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit
perisheth. * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me.
In hymns the most wise one described thee beforehand, О all-hymned one, as
the couch whereon God, Who was hypostatically incarnate from thee, did rest;
and He Who was born from thee without commingling hath glorified thee.
О all-hymned Virgin, as one chosen thou didst become the chosen vesture of
the Word, for, taking flesh from thee as it were a robe of divine purple, He hath
reigned, arrayed in majesty.
Glory ..., О Bride of God, thou didst become the receptacle of the divine
Union, more lustrous than gold; for through thee God became a man and
conversed with mankind as a man.
Now & ever ..., The evil of heresy hath brought death upon those who refuse
to honor thee, О all-hymned Virgin; for in their malice they hide at the sight of
the most glorious likeness of thine image.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone III:
In the fervor of faith I cry out to thee with unworthy lips and a defiled heart,
О Theotokos: Save me who am drowning in sins! Take pity on one who is slain by
despair, that, saved, I may cry aloud to thee: Rejoice, О Virgin, thou help of
Christians!
ODE VII
Irmos: Of old the three children did not worship the golden image, * of the
Persian idol, * but chanted in the midst of the furnace: * O God of our
fathers, blessed art Thou! 
Having been united conformably and been revealed to be incorrupt, the bush
and the flame manifestly show thee forth, О Virgin; for thou hast given birth to
God, yet remained a virgin.
The fleece and the dew, shown forth in change, prefigured thy birthgiving for
Gideon; for thou alone hast borne the divine Word in thy womb, as though He
were rain, О Virgin Mother.
Glory ..., The fire of my sin created a flame surpassing that of Gehenna for
me, О pure one. By thy mercy do thou quench it, guiding me to the light by
repentance.
Now & ever ..., Venerating the appearance of thy countenance as the primal
image, О most pure Theotokos, we all have thee as a helper and a right effective
protection before God forever.
ODE VIII
Irmos: The Babylonian furnace burnt not the children, * neither did the fire
of the Godhead consume the Virgin, * wherefore with the faithful children
we cry aloud: * 'Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord'.
Finding thee as an all-radiant lily amid thorns, shining with the splendor of
beauty through the divine Spirit, the Father desired thee, the Bride who knew not
wedlock, as a habitation for His Son.
Without hesitation I manifestly glorify thee, the most immaculate Virgin, as
more holy than the host on high; for thou didst bear in thy womb their Creator,
Who in an uncommingled union received flesh from thee.
Glory ..., Having preserved thy virginity intact, О Virgin, thou wast truly
shown to be the Mother of the Son of God, becoming a Bride through the
Father’s good pleasure and the incorrupt receptacle of the Spirit of glory.
Now & ever ..., God Who is immaterial and invisible by nature was ineffably
and supra-naturally born as a man from the holy Virgin, becoming visible, two
natures in a single hypostasis, wherein He is seen and depicted.
ODE IX
Irmos: New is the wonder and befitting of God: * for the Lord clearly
passes through the closed gate of the Virgin: * naked at His going in and
God bearing flesh at His coming out, * while the gate remaineth closed. *
As ineffably the Theotokos and Mother of our God we magnify her.
A holy fruit sprang forth from the holy root of the barren and sanctified one:
the Maiden Theotokos who, by the law of God the Father, hath blossomed forth
never-withering and perfecting Life. And Anna rejoicing, receives in her old age a
babe, the Mother of God, whom we glorify.
New and godly is the birthgiving of thy holy and God-bearing womb, О pure
one; for therein the incarnate holy Son was depicted in human image by the finger
of the Father and by the Holy Spirit. Him do we magnify as both God and man
without commingling.
Glory ..., All judgment crieth out against me, for the deeds of my sinful actions
lift up their voice to forbid me, and my whole soul knoweth those things whereby
it will be condemned, and it trembleth before the flame of Gehenna. О Lady,
before the end, from which do thou deliver me by thy prayers.
Now & ever ..., After giving birth thou wast shown to be incorrupt, О pure
one, for in a manner transcending nature, О Theotokos, thou hast given birth
immutably to the Creator of all as a man in the flesh, though He was not
separated from the essence of the Father; and through the divine Spirit thou didst
remain a Virgin. Wherefore, glorifying thee, we lift our voices in hymnody.
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and the rest as usual. Dismissal.
SUNDAY MORNING: TONE III
AT NOCTURNS
The priest saith: “Blessed is our God ...”, and we say: Amen. Glory to Thee,
our God, glory to Thee. О heavenly King... Trisagion through Our Father... Priest:
For Thine is the kingdom ..., And we say: Amen. Lord, have mercy (12 times),
Glory..., Now & ever..., О come, let us worship (Thrice). Psalm 50 (Have mercy
on me, О God...)
And then, the Canon to the Holy & Life-creating Trinity, the acrostic whereof
is “I hymn Thee, О Trinity, the One Godhead”, the composition of Metrophanes,
in Tone III:
ODE I
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree,
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified.
Refrain: О Most Holy Trinity our God, glory to Thee!
О sole unapproachable Dominion, Thou one Godhead of the Trinity, grant
me Thy thrice-radiant light, that I may hymn Thee Who art unceasingly hymned
with thrice-holy hymns by the angels.
All the immaterial ranks hymn Thee in sanctity as the one creative, thriceradiant and clearly originate Cause; and with them we, the multitudes of peoples,
likewise hymn and faithfully glorify Thee with our mouths of clay.
Glory ..., In symbolic manner the theologians fittingly call Thee Mind, and
Word and Spirit, signifying the dispassionate begetting of the Son from the
unbegotten Father, as well as the procession of the divine Spirit, О God Who art
the sole source of all.
Now & ever ..., Having assumed human nature in that by nature Thou lovest
mankind, О Word of God, Thou didst shine forth the Trinitarian light of the one
Godhead, which is the sole and only source, pointing out to all the most pure and
most glorious Virgin who gave birth to Thee.
ODE III
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in
Thy love.
Elijah of old, having commanded that water be poured forth on the split
wood, mystically manifested the Trinitarian Hypostasis of the one divine
dominion.
The corrupt nature of mortals hymneth Thee, the one, thrice-radiant and
immutable Creator; and cries out unto thee, О Master: Deliver and save me from
every manner of uncertainty.
Glory ..., Uttering the same words as the prophets, the glorious apostles and
the preachers of the Faith., we, the faithful, glorify Thee, the Trinity equal in
activity, О God of all.
Now & ever ..., Through thee, О most pure one, Christ descended from His
exalted throne, elevating mankind, in that He is the Lover of mankind; and He
hath shone forth the three-Sunned light upon all.
Lord, have mercy. (Thrice)
Sessional hymns, in Tone III:
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:
О Christ, our only transcendent Lord, Scion of the beginningless Father, and
Thou, О most divine Spirit, have mercy upon Thy servants: for we all have
sinned, yet have we not turned away from Thee. Wherefore, we beseech Thee, О
Lord in three Hypostases: In that Thou hast authority, save Thy creation from
every evil circumstance.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
In His goodness, the transcendent God and Lord became incarnate from thee,
assuming our essence; and He dwelt among us. Wherefore, honoring His divine
manhood, we proclaim thee to be the Theotokos O all-pure one who knew not
wedlock, glorifying the supreme wonder of thy seedless birthgiving.
ODE IV
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’
A double branch sprouted forth from the Father, as from a root: the Son and
the upright Spirit, consubstantial offshoots divinely planted, blossoms equally
without beginning. For there are the three Lights of the Godhead. (Twice)
Glory ..., The multitudes of noetic intelligences unceasingly hymn thee, the
inconceivable God; and with them we render glory, saying: О transcendent
Trinity, save Thy servants, in that Thou lovest mankind.
Now & ever ..., Thou hast set us afire with Thy love, О greatly merciful Word
of God Who for our sake became incarnate without undergoing change,
mystically teaching us about the one thrice-radiant Godhead. Wherefore, we
glorify Thee.
ODE V
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high *
borne aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have
foreseen God made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the
King of peace.’
When Isaiah mystically beheld God, the one Sovereign Lord, glorified in three
Hypostases by the most pure voices of the seraphim, whereupon he was
straightway sent to proclaim the thrice-radiant Essence, the three-Sunned Unity.
(Twice)
Glory ..., О three-Sunned Unity Who in the beginning created the essence of
all things, visible and invisible, out of nothing, and Who hast delivered from all
temptations those who with faith hymn Thee as the one God: grant unto us Thy
glory.
Now & ever ..., With love we hymn and bless thee, О Virgin, Who hast
become the radiant and pure bridal-chamber of God; for from thee Christ Who is
One of the Trinity and the Lord of glory, was born in two natures and wills.
ODE VI
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit
perisheth. * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me.
As a sojourner, Abraham was deemed worthy to mystically to receive the one
Lord in three Hypostases, made manifest in the forms of men. (Twice)
Glory ..., Guide the hearts of Thy servants to the unapproachable light, О
three-sunned Lord, and grant the effulgence of Thy glory unto our souls, that we
may be illumined by Thine ineffable goodness.
Now & ever ..., Open unto me the portals of the light of Him Who was born
of thy womb, О most pure one, that I may behold the thrice-brilliant rays of His
divinity and glorify thee, О most radiant Lady.
Lord, have mercy. (Thrice)
Sessional hymns, in Tone III:
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”:
We hymn the three-Sunned dominion of the consubstantial divine nature, and
with thrice-holy voices we cry: Holy art Thou, О beginningless Father! Holy art
Thou, О equally-beginningless Son, and Thou, О Holy Spirit, О our only God
Who art indivisible, О Creator of all, Who lovest mankind!
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
О supreme wonder! How did the Infinite One come to be contained within
thy womb, and become incarnate, and appear as a man, without enduring change
or separation from the divine and immutable Divinity, О all-pure Maiden?
Wherefore with faith, we ever proclaim and glorify thee, the Theotokos.
ODE VII
Irmos: As of old Thou didst bedew * the three pious children in the
Chaldean flames, * so also with the radiant fire of Thy divinity * illumine us
who cry to Thee, * ‘Blessed art Thou, the God of our fathers!’
Through Thy light-giving radiance, O Master, show me to be a splendid
temple of Thy thrice-radiant godhead, far above the cruel darkness of sin and the
passions. Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!
We proclaim the one face of the Godhead in three Hypostases and individual
characteristics: the Father, the Son and the Spirit; crying aloud: Blessed art Thou,
the God of our fathers!
Glory ..., Of old, God in three Hypostases appeared to Abraham at the Oak of
Mamre, mercifully giving him Isaac as a reward for his hospitality. Him do we
now glorify as the God of our fathers.
Now & ever ..., The Creator of all appeared on earth, divinely becoming a man
through thy virginal and all-pure womb; and He hath deified us, О blessed, allpure and most pure Theotokos.
ODE VIII
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him
throughout all ages.
The Word and the Spirit Who are equally without beginning came from the
root of the beginningless Father, and as offshoots of the transcendent Godhead
they have shown forth the one glory and power of the Trinity, Whom all of us,
the faithful, hymn forever. (Twice)
Glory ..., By Thine effulgences Thou dost direct the ranks of heaven to
continually chant thrice-holy divine hymns to the thrice-radiant Dominion, equal
in power, О Father, О Word of like form with Him, and Thou, О Spirit. Wherefore, we hymn Thee throughout all ages.
Now & ever ..., Perceiving thy birthgiving from afar, the sayings of the
prophets praised it as being without seed, О Theotokos, and praised Him Who
was born from thee in a manner transcending nature, О Lady. And with them, we
also sing to Him as Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.
ODE IX
Irmos: New is the wonder and befitting of God: * for the Lord clearly
passes through the closed gate of the Virgin: * naked at His going in and
God bearing flesh at His coming out, * while the gate remaineth closed. *
As ineffably the Theotokos and Mother of our God we magnify her.
The God-beholding ranks of the incorporeal ones desire to mount on high
with their wings, to see clearly the thrice-radiant glory; yet they are in exceeding
great awe of the unapproachable Light, and unceasingly cry out hymns. And
together with them we glorify Thee, the only Trinity. (Twice)
Glory ..., Having received from Thee a noetic and reason-endowed soul with
insatiable love, О Master, God of all, with our whole heart we hymn Thee, Who
art truly the one Essence, the Trinity of Hypostases. Wherefore, as Thou art
greatly merciful, О Compassionate One, have pity on us.
Now & ever ..., Show me to be a splendid temple of Thy thrice-radiant
Godhead Which alone is the source of all, that I may serve Thee, the Creator of
all, in purity, and noetically behold Thine ineffable glory: through the supplications of the only Theotokos, whom we fittingly magnify as most glorious.
Then, the hymn of Gregory the Sinaite:
(which is chanted every Sunday after the canon)
It is truly meet to glorify Thee, the Word of God, before Whom the cherubim
tremble and quake, and Whom the hosts of heaven glorify. And with fear we
glorify Christ, the Bestower of life, Who rose from the tomb on the third day.
With divine songs let us all in a godly manner hymn the Father, the Son and
the Spirit divine, the one Might in three Hypostases, the Sovereignty and
Dominion,
Whom all mortals hymn and the hosts of heaven glorify, the essential Unity in
three Hypostases, Who is worshipped with faith by all.
We magnify Thee, the Godhead, the Lord of the cherubim, the incomparable
divine Origin of the seraphim, the indivisible Trinity in Unity.
I worship God: the beginningless Father, the Son Who is equally without
beginning, and the Spirit. With hymns let us honor the one indivisible and unified
Essence, the threefold Unity.
Shine forth Thy dazzling lightning flashes upon me, О my God in three
Hypostases, Creator of all, and show me to be a splendid, luminous and
immutable habitation of Thine unapproachable glory.
With fear let us glorify Christ the Bestower of life, Who ineffably became
incarnate of the Virgin, for the cherubim tremble and quake before Him, and the
angelic armies glorify Him.
The rest of Nocturnes, and the dismissal.
AT MATINS
On “God is The Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, in Tone III:
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath wrought
might with His arm. * trampling down death by death; * becoming the first-born
of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting the world
great mercy. (Twice)
Glory ..., the Troparion from the Menaion, otherwise Glory ..., Now & Ever ...,
The Theotokion, in Tone III, (or in the Tone of that from the Menaion):
We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O Virgin
Theotokos; * for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross in the
flesh * He had received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in that He
is the Lover of mankind.
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma II), the Sessional hymns of the
Resurrection. In Tone III:
Christ hath arisen from the dead, * the first fruits of those that sleep. * The
First-born of creation * and Creator of all that hath come to be, * hath renewed in
Himself the corrupted nature of our race. * Death, no longer art thou lord, ** for
the Master of all things hath destroyed thy dominion.
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted on high; * forget not
Thy paupers to the end.
Having tasted death in the flesh, O Lord, * Thou hast blotted out the
bitterness of death by Thine arising * strengthening mankind against it, * and
announcing the abolition of the ancient curse. ** Defender of our lives, O Lord,
glory be to Thee!
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:
Awed by the beauty of thy virginity * and the exceeding radiance of thy purity,
* Gabriel called out unto thee, O Theotokos: * What worthy hymn of praise can I
offer unto thee? * And what shall I name thee? * I am in doubt and stand in awe.
* Wherefore as commanded, I cry to thee: ** Rejoice, O Full of Grace.
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma III), the Sessional hymns of the
Resurrection. In Tone III:
Awed by Thine immutable Godhead * and by Thy voluntary passion, O Lord,
* Hades lamented, ‘I tremble at Thy body’s essence, which remaineth incorrupt. *
I behold Thee, the One who is invisible, mystically making war against me; *
wherefore those whom I hold cry out': ** 'Glory, O Christ, to Thy Resurrection!’
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all
Thy wonders.
We the faithful contemplate an ineffable mystery: * Thine incomprehensible
Crucifixion and Thine inexplicable Arising. * For today Death and Hades have
been despoiled, * but mankind hath been clothed in incorruption. * Wherefore
with thanksgiving we cry aloud unto Thee, * ‘Glory, O Christ, to Thy
Resurrection!’
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
Mystically didst thou contain in thy womb * the Incomprehensible and
Uncircumscribed One, * consubstantial with the Father and the Spirit; * and we
acknowledge in thine Offspring one unconfused energy of the Trinity Who is
glorified in the world. * And so with thanksgiving we cry unto thee, ** ‘Rejoice,
thou full of grace!’
If a POLYELEOS is appointed, we chant: (Select verses):
Verse: Praise ye the name of the Lord; O ye servants, praise the Lord.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
Verse: Blessed is the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth in Jerusalem. Alleluia,
alleluia, alleluia.
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy
endureth forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
Verse: O give thanks unto the God of Heaven; for His mercy endureth
forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
(On the Sunday of the Prodigal Son, Meat-Fare, and Cheese-Fare Sundays,
after the Polyeleos we chant Psalm 136: “By the rivers of Babylon…")
Then, the Megalynarion of the feast is chanted, if there is one, with the
selected psalm verse. However, if it is a Sunday, in general parish practice the
Megalynarion is chanted only once, without the psalm verse, unless it is a Great
feast of the Lord, or the Theotokos.
The Resurrectional Verses (THE EVLOGITARIA)
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
The assembly of angels was amazed, * beholding Thee numbered among the
dead; * yet, O Savior, * destroying the stronghold of death, * and with Thyself
raising up Adam, ** Thou hast freed all from Hades.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
Why mingle ye myrrh with tears of pity, * O ye women disciples? * Thus said
the radiant angel within the tomb * addressing the myrrh-bearing women; *
behold the tomb and understand, ** for the Savior hath arisen from the tomb.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
Very early * the myrrh-bearing women hastened * unto Thy tomb, lamenting,
* but the angel stood before them and said: * the time for lamentation is passed,
weep not, ** but tell the apostles of the Resurrection.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
The myrrh-bearing women, * with myrrh came to Thy tomb, O Savior,
bewailing, * but the angel addressed them, saying: * Why number ye the living
among the dead, * for as God ** He is risen from the tomb.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
Let us worship the Father, * and His Son, and the Holy Spirit, * the Holy
Trinity, * one in essence, * crying with the Seraphim: ** Holy, Holy, Holy art
Thou, O Lord.
Both Now & ever ..., and unto the ages of ages, Amen..
In bringing forth the Giver of life, * thou hast delivered Adam from sin, O
Virgin, * and hast brought joy to Eve * instead of sorrow; * and those fallen from
life * have thereunto been restored, ** by Him Who of thee was incarnate, God
and man.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice).
Then the little Litany and:
The Sessional Hymn:
A Cause of amazement by his appearance, * and source of refreshment by his
speech, * the radiant Angel spake unto the myrrh-bearing women saying, * ‘Why
do ye seek the living in a grave? * He hath arisen, emptying the graves. * Know
that the unchangeable One hath changed corruption. * Wherefore cry unto God
saying: * How fearful are Thy works! ** For Thou hast saved mankind.’
The Songs of Ascent: 1st Antiphon:
Thou, O Word, didst deliver the captivity of Zion from Babylon, * Deliver me
also ** from the passions unto life.
Those who sow in the South * with tears inspired by God, ** shall in joy reap
sheaves of everlasting life.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ...,
By the Holy Spirit, together with the Father and the Son * shineth forth the
reflection of every good gift, ** In Him all things live and have their being. 
2nd Antiphon:
Except the Lord build the house of the virtues, * in vain do we labor. ** While
He doth protect our soul no one layeth waste our city.
The Saints, O Christ, fruits of the womb, * are by the Spirit, always sons to
Thee, ** as Thou art to the Father.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ...,
The Holy Spirit is the inspiration of all that is holy and wise; * for He doth
quicken every creature. ** Let us worship Him together with the Father and the
Son, for He is God.
3rd Antiphon:
Those who fear the Lord are blessed * as they walk along the paths of His
commandments; * for they partake of the life-giving fruit.
Be glad, Chief Shepherd, * beholding Thine offspring around Thy table *
bearing the branches of good works.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ...,
In the Holy Spirit is a superabundance of glory; * for from Him proceedeth
forth grace and life into all creation; * wherefore He is praised together with the
Father and the Word.
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: Say among the nations that the Lord is king; *
for He hath established the universe which shall not be shaken
The Verse: O Sing unto the Lord a new song. Sing unto the Lord all the
earth.
Let every breath ...,
The Sunday Resurrection Gospel. Then:
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord
Jesus, * the only sinless One. * We venerate Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy holy
Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we know none
other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye faithful, * let us
worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the Cross joy hath
come to all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His Resurrection; *
for, having endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by death.
Psalm 50, Then:
Glory ..., in Tone VI:
Through the prayers of the Apostles * O Merciful One, ** blot out the
multitude of our transgressions.
Now & Ever ..., in Tone VI:
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the
multitude of our transgressions.
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according
to the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions.
Jesus having risen from the grave, * as He foretold, * hath given us life eternal,
** and great mercy.
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...”, Then the Canons:
Resurrection Canons Tone III.
ODE I
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree,
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
He who sentenced the earth to bring forth thorns as the fruit of the sweat of
the transgressor, hath accepted in the body a crown of thorns from a lawless
hand, abolishing the curse. He is our God, wherefore He is glorified.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Our God hath been shown to be a Triumphant victor and vanquisher of
death, for death was smitten with fear when our God, having taken living flesh
subject to suffering, wrestled with the tyrant and raised all with Himself,
wherefore He hath been glorified.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: All the nations glorify thee as the true Theotokos, O thou who
hast given birth without seed; for having come into thy hallowed womb, our God
assumed that which was according to our nature, and as both God and man He
was born from thee.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
By His divine blood, Christ hath redeemed the race of mankind, enslaved to
the sin-loving tyrant, and making us divine He hath renewed us, wherefore He
hath been glorified.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Christ, the guardian of life, as a mortal willingly tasted death; while by nature
being immortal He hath granted life to the dead, wherefore He hath been
glorified.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Every order of heavenly beings fittingly bends the knee, O Virgin, to Him who
was incarnate from thee, and together with them, those below the earth, and those
upon the earth, for He hath been glorified.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O the mysteries which took place within thee! For God, who abundantly
bestoweth all good things, hath given us the divine Spirit, and taken flesh from
thee, O Maiden, wherefore He hath been glorified.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE III
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in
Thy love.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Through Thy Cross the wicked one hath been shamed, for he hath fallen into
the pit which he himself hath dug; while the horn of the humble, O Christ, hath
been exalted in Thy Resurrection.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
The preaching of true religion hath covered like flowing waters the seas of the
nations, O Lover of mankind; for by arising from the tomb Thou hast revealed
the light of the Trinity.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Glorious things are spoken of thee, O living city of Him who is
king forever; for through thee, O Sovereign Lady, God dwelt among those on
earth.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
O Immaculate Cross, thou wast revealed to be a purification from the
abominations of idols, for Jesus, supremely divine, stretched out His arms upon
Thee.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
May we the faithful worship thee, O Life-bearing tomb, for Christ, who is
truly our God, hath been buried in thee and arose from thee.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
A rod from the root of Jesse hath budded forth, as the Prophet said, for the
Virgin blossomed forth with a flower for us - Thee O Christ; Holy art Thou, O
Lord.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
That Thou mightest make those born of earth partakers of the divine nature,
Thou didst impoverish Thyself in assuming our flesh from the Virgin; Holy art
Thou, O Lord.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
The small litany:
ODE IV
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast in love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest
Thy Only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
In Thy compassion, O Christ, Thou didst bear marks and wounds, bravely
bearing the injurious blows and with long-suffering even endured being spat
upon, wherewith Thou hast wrought salvation for me; Glory to Thy power, O
Lord!
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
In a mortal body, O Life, Thou hast partaken of death, for the sake of the
wretchedness of Thy needy and the sighing of Thy poor, and having despoiled the
seducing destroyer, Thou hast raised all with Thee, O Glorious One, gloriously
hast Thou been glorified.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Remember, O Christ, the flock which Thou hast procured by
Thy Passion. Accept the compassionate supplications of Thy most blessed Mother
and watching over it in its affliction, deliver it by Thy power, O Lord.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
O Lover of mankind, Who hath fashioned mankind according to Thine image,
when it was slain by sin through transgression, Thou didst save it by Thy
crucifixion on Calvary.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Death hath given up the dead whom it had swallowed, while the dominion of
Hades, which brought forth corruption, was destroyed when Thou didst arise
from the tomb, O Lord.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: O Mary, thou art like a pure golden censor filling the world with
the sweetest fragrance, for without commingling, one of the Holy Trinity, the
Incarnate Word of God, hath made His abode in Thee.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Thou, O Master, Who hath established the mountains in accordance with the
ordinances of divine knowledge, art the stone which, without hands, hath been
hewn from the Virgin. To Thy power be glory, O Lover of mankind.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O Word, Thou hast healed our diseased nature, by uniting with it in the Virgin,
the most effectual medicine of Thine immaculate Godhead, O Master.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O Lord, Thou art my portion and my most desired heritage; for, Thou O
Word, hast from the Virgin united with me thine own Hypostasis, having been
manifest a person in the flesh.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE V
Irmos: I rise at dawn unto Thee, * the Creator of all, * surpassing all
worldly understanding; * for Thy commandments are light, * wherein do
Thou guide me.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Handed over to an unjust judge by the envy of the Jews, Thou the All-seeing
one who justly judgest all the earth, didst deliver Adam from the ancient
condemnation.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
O Christ, who arose from the dead, grant peace to Thy Churches, and by the
invincible power of Thy Cross, save our souls.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Thou alone hast appeared, O Ever-Virgin, as a Holy Tabernacle
wider than the Heavens, for thou hast received the Word of God, whom all of
creation cannot contain.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
O Christ, when Thy side was pierced by the lance, Thou didst deliver from the
curse her who was formed from man's side and who had became the agent of ruin
for all mankind.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Christ, our Savior, equal in being with the Father, hath raised from the dead
the sacred temple of His most pure and all-honored body.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The Word of God, O Virgin, thy Son, and the Creator of Adam the firstformed, is not a creature, though He hath fashioned for Himself living flesh from
thee.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Equal to the Father, is thy Son O Virgin, the Word of God, a perfect person in
two natures, Jesus the Lord, perfect God and perfect man.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE VI
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my
spirit perisheth. * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm *
and like Peter save me, * O my Helmsman.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
By Thy gracious descent, an abyss of mercy and compassion hath surrounded
me; for becoming incarnate and taking the form of a servant, O Master, Thou hast
made me divine and glorified me together with Thyself.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
The man-slayer became as one dead when he saw the one who had been put
to death restored to life. These are the tokens of Thy Resurrection, O Christ, and
the rewards of Thine immaculate Passion.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: O Most pure one, who beyond understanding art alone the
mediatrix between the Creator and mankind, beseech thy Son to be merciful to
thy sinful servants and make thyself their protectress.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Tried by stripes, and by the Passion of Thy Cross, Thou hast raised with Thee,
those who lay slain in Hades; therefore I cry unto Thee, ‘Raise up my life up from
corruption, O Lover of mankind.’
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
The gates of Hades now open to Thee in fear, O Christ, and the enemy’s
possessions are ravished, wherefore the Women met Thee receiving gladness
instead of sorrow.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
He who by nature hath no part in any created form, hath taken our form from
the undefiled Maiden, becoming a man in form and substance, yet unchanged in
His Divinity.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
From an abyss of sins and from the tempest of the passions do thou deliver
me, O Pure one, for thou art a safe haven and an abyss of wonders for those who
in faith have recourse to thee.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
The small litany:
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone III:
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:
Thou didst arise today, O Merciful One, * and hast led us out from the gates
of death. * Adam danceth today, and Eve rejoiceth. * The Prophets also, along
with Patriarchs, * praise without ceasing the divine might of Thy authority.
Ikos: Let heaven and earth dance today, and with one accord sing the praises
of Christ our God, for He hath raised the prisoners from the tombs. All creation
rejoiceth together as it offers fitting songs to the Creator of all things and our
Redeemer. For today, as Giver of life, He draweth mortals out of Hades raising
them to heaven. He layeth low the uprisings of the enemy and hath destroyed the
gates of Hades by the divine might of His authority. 
ODE VII
Irmos: As of old Thou didst bedew * the three pious children in the
Chaldean flames, * so also with the radiant fire of Thy divinity * illumine us
who cry to Thee, * ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!’
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
The shining veil of the Temple was rent in twain by the Crucifixion of the
Creator, revealing the truth hidden in the scriptures to the faithful who cry, ‘O
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!’
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
When Thy side was pierced, O Christ, drops of Thy life-bearing blood, flowed
by the divine dispensation of God, and fell upon the earth refashioning those who
cry, ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!’
Refrain: We bless the Lord; Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Trinitarian: Let us believers glorify the good Spirit, along with the Father and
the only-begotten Son, as we honor one Principle and one Godhead in three
Hypostases and cry, ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!’
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
The sun is not darkened for a mere man hanging upon a Cross, but rather,
upon beholding God incarnate, to whom we also sing, ‘O God of our fathers,
blessed art Thou!’
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Cowardly Hades, trembling before Him who is strong in His Godhead and
who granteth incorruption, spewed forth the souls of the Just, who cried out, ‘O
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!’
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Theotokion: O Most pure one, thou art a precious treasury of blessings for
those who, with a pure heart, confess thee to be the Mother of God; for from
thee the God of our fathers became incarnate.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O Lord of glory and ruler of the powers on high, Thou who art seated with
the Father and wast carried in the arms of the Virgin; ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord,
the God of our fathers.'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Death is bold, but when it battled with Thee, O God, made flesh from the
Virgin as a man, Thou didst destroy it; 'Blessed art Thou, O Lord, the God of our
fathers.'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
We all acknowledge thee to be the Theotokos who didst bear God in thy
womb; for thou hast given birth to one of the Trinity, incarnate from thee.
Blessed, O Most pure one, is the fruit of thy womb.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE VIII
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him
throughout all ages.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
The radiance of the Temple was shattered when Thy Cross was set upon
Calvary, and all creation was shaken as it sang in fear; ‘All ye works of the Lord,
bless ye the Lord, and supremely exalt him throughout all ages.’
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Thou didst rise from the tomb, O Christ, and by Thy divine power, the Tree
hath restored him who had fallen through temptation as he cried aloud; ‘All ye
works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, and supremely exalt him throughout all
ages.’
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Thou hast been declared a living Temple of God, and a spiritual
Ark; for thou, O most pure Birthgiver of God, didst reconcile the Creator to
mortal mankind, wherefore we, all His works, fittingly praise thee and supremely
exalt thee throughout all ages.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
The Word was not subject to suffering, for in His Godhead He cannot suffer;
but it was in the flesh that God suffered, to Whom we also sing; ‘All ye works of
the Lord, bless ye the Lord, and supremely exalt him throughout all ages.’
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Having fallen asleep as a mortal, Thou wast raised up as immortal, O Savior,
delivering from death those who sing; ‘All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord,
and supremely exalt him throughout all ages.’
Refrain: We bless the Lord; Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Trinitarian: Devoutly do we worship the Godhead, united in three Hypostases,
and we sing without ceasing, ‘All ye works of the Lord bless ye the Lord, and
supremely exalt him throughout all ages.’
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O Blessed Virgin Mother, who hath been raised above the spiritual powers and
set next to God, we bless thine Offspring, and supremely exalt Him throughout all
ages.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Thou hast revealed thy natural comeliness to be most fair when Thou hast
given birth to the Godhead in the flesh, O Blessed Virgin, wherefore we bless
thine Offspring, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.
After the Troparia from the Menaion for ODE VIII, we chant:
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely
exalting Him throughout all ages.
And then the appointed Katavasia:
After which we chant the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (the Magnificat)
Note: on great feasts special Megalynarion are chanted in place of the Magnificat:
Verse: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in
God my Savior.
And after each Verse:
Refrain: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more
glorious than the Seraphim; * who without corruption gavest birth to God the
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; * for
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: For the Mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His
name; * and His mercy is on them that fear Him * unto generation and
generation.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: He hath showed strength with His arm, * and He hath scattered the
proud in the imagination of their heart.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: He hath put down the mighty from their seat, * and exalted them of
low degree; * He hath filled the hungry with good things, * and the rich He
hath sent empty away.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: He hath holpen His servant Israel * in remembrance of His mercy,
* as He spake to our fathers, * to Abraham and his seed forever.
Refrain: More honorable …
ODE IX
Irmos: New is the wonder and befitting of God: * for the Lord clearly
passes through the closed gate of the Virgin: * naked at His going in and
God bearing flesh at His coming out, * while the gate remaineth closed. *
As ineffably the Theotokos and Mother of our God we magnify her.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Fearful it is, O Word of God, to behold Thee the Creator elevated upon the
Tree, suffering in the flesh on behalf of Thy servants, and lying lifeless in a grave,
and yet releasing the dead from Hades. Wherefore, O Christ, as all-powerful we
magnify Thee.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
By being placed as one dead in a tomb, O Christ, Thou hast saved the
Forefathers from the corruption of death, and Thou didst make life blossom forth
by Thine arising from the dead, leading mortal nature to the light and clothing it
with divine incorruption. Wherefore as the source of the ever-living light we
magnify Thee.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Thou wast revealed, O all-pure one, as the Temple and throne of
God, in which He who liveth in the highest made His abode, born without a man,
and in no way opening the gates of thy flesh. Therefore by thine unceasing
prayers, O Holy One, finally defeat the tribes of the barbarians and subject them
to our King.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
O Christ our Savior, Thou hast became a source of glory for mortals by a
dishonorable death, which Thou didst taste through crucifixion in Thy mortal
nature, and by which Thou hast granted unto me incorruption, for Thou lovest
mankind.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
By rising from the tomb, O Christ, Thou hast saved me, and for the sake of
Thy compassionate mercy, Thou hast exalted me and brought me to the Father,
Thy Begetter, at Whose right hand Thou hast taken Thy seat, O Lord.
Another, of the Theotokos.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
For the devout faithful, who experience the ever-increasing spiritual and divine
desire that cometh from singing praises in honor of thee, O Virgin, there can
never be enough; wherefore we ever magnify thee as the Mother of God.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Thou hast enthroned her who bare Thee, O Christ as an unfailing intercessor
for us. By her supplications, O Merciful one, grant unto us the Spirit who giveth
freely of His goodness, and who proceedeth through Thee from the Father.
The small litany:
Then, “Holy is our God ...”: (Thrice)
Exapostilarion (Svetilen).
Note: The Exapostilarion is taken from the prescribed Eothinon according to
the Resurrection Gospel, however, If the Menaion service is ‘feasted’ the
Exapostilarion, with the appointed Theotokion, are taken from the Menaion.
On the Aposticha: “Let every breath ...”, 8 Stichera of the Resurrection,
however, if the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ sing the first 4 Stichera from
the Resurrection, and the last 4 from the Menaion, with the appointed verses.
On the Aposticha, the Resurrection Stichera, in Tone III:
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written * This glory shall be
to all His saints.
Come all ye nations, * acknowledge the power of the dread mystery; * for
Christ our Savior, the beginningless Word, * was crucified for us and was willingly
buried * and arose from the dead * to save the whole universe. ** Him let us
worship.
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His
power.
Thy guards recounted all the marvels, O Lord, * but, by filling their right
hands with money, * the Sanhedrin of folly thought to conceal Thy Resurrection,
* which the world doth glorify; ** have mercy upon us.
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the
multitude of His greatness.
All things have been filled with joy on receiving proof the Resurrection. * For
Mary Magdalene having come to the tomb, * found an Angel seated upon the
stone, * radiant in shining raiment, saying, * ‘Why dost Thou seek the living
among the dead? * He is not here, but He hath arisen, as He foretold, ** and
goeth before Thee into Galilee.’
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the
psaltery and harp.
In Thy light, O Master and Lover of mankind, * shall we see light. * For Thou
didst rise from the dead, * granting salvation unto the race of mankind, *
wherefore all creation doth glorify Thee, the only sinless one; ** have mercy upon
us.
Other Stichera by Anatolius:
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and
flute.
As a morning hymn, O Lord, * the Myrrh-bearing Women offered Thee their
tears. * For bringing perfumes of sweet fragrances, they came to Thy grave, eager
to anoint Thy most pure Body. * An angel seated upon the stone declared unto
them the good tidings, * ‘Why seek ye the living among the dead? * For He hath
trampled down death, He hath arisen as God, ** granting unto all His great
mercy.’
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.
A radiant Angel seated by Thy life-giving tomb * spake to the Myrrh-bearing
women saying, * ‘The Redeemer hath emptied the tombs, * He hath despoiled
Hades ** and hath arisen on the third day as alone God and all-powerful.’
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted high; * forget not
Thy paupers to the end.
On the first day of the week Mary Magdalene came to the tomb seeking Thee.
* When she did not find Thee, she lamented and cried out with grief, * ‘Alas, my
Savior, how hast Thou, the King of all, been stolen?’ * But a pair of radiant Angels
from within the sepulcher cried out, * ‘Why dost thou weep, woman?’ * ‘I weep’,
she said, ‘because they have taken my Lord from the tomb * and I know not
where they have laid him’. * Whereupon, turning back and seeing Thee, she at
once cried out, ** ‘My Lord and my God, glory be to Thee!’
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all
Thy wonders.
The Hebrews shut Life within the tomb; * but the Thief opened the Paradise
of pure delight with His voice when he cried aloud saying, * ‘The One who wast
crucified with me and who wast hung with me upon the tree * also appeareth to
me seated upon a throne together with the Father. ** For He is Christ our God,
who hath great mercy.'
Glory ..., The Eothinon of the Resurrection Gospel
Note: If the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ the Eothinon is taken from
the Menaion, and the Eothinon of the Gospel is read at the end of Matins.
Now & Ever ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took
flesh from thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, Eve
set free, * death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in praise
we cry: ** Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-pleased,
glory be to Thee.
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion.
Today is salvation come unto the world; * let us sing praises to Him that arose
from the tomb, * and is the Author of our life. * For, having destroyed death by
death, ** He hath given us the victory and great mercy.
AT THE LITURGY
Typika and Beatitudes.
At The Liturgy Beatitudes, in Tone III
From paradise didst Thou drive our forefather Adam, who had broken Thy
commandment, O Christ; but, O Compassionate One, Thou didst cause to dwell
therein the thief who confessed Thee on the cross, crying out: “Remember me, O
Savior, in Thy kingdom!"
With the curse of death didst Thou condemn us who had sinned, O Lord,
Bestower of life; yet having suffered in Thy flesh, O sinless Master, Thou hast
granted life unto mortals who cry out: “Remember us also in Thy kingdom!"
In rising from the dead, Thou hast raised us up from the passions with Thyself
through Thy resurrection, O Lord; and all the power of death hast Thou
destroyed, O Savior. Wherefore, with faith we cry out to Thee: “Remember us
also in Thy kingdom!"
O Thou who as God grantest life, by Thy three days in the tomb Thou didst
raise up with Thyself the dead in Hades, and as One Who is good Thou hast
poured forth incorruption upon all of us who with faith ever cry out: “Remember
us also in Thy kingdom!"
Risen from the dead, O Savior, Thou didst first appear to the myrrh-bearing
women, crying out: “Rejoice!” and through them Thou didst announce Thy
resurrection to Thy friends, O Christ. Wherefore, with faith we cry out to Thee,
“Remember us also in Thy kingdom! ”
Moses, stretching out his arms on the mountain, prefigured the Cross and thus
conquered Amalek. And, receiving it with faith as a mighty weapon against the
demons, we all cry out: “Remember us also in Thy kingdom!”
O ye faithful, let us hymn the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the one God, the
one Lord, as from a single Sun; for the Trinity is thrice-luminous and enlightening
all who cry out: “Remember us also in Thy kingdom! ”
Theotokion: Rejoice, O portal of God, through which the incarnate Creator
passed without breaking thy seal! Rejoice, thou illumined cloud which bore Christ,
the divine Rain! Rejoice, ladder and throne of heaven! Rejoice, honored mountain
of God, fruitful and unquarried!
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone III:
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath wrought
might with His arm. * trampling down death by death; * becoming the first-born
of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting the world
great mercy.
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone III:
Thou didst arise today, O Merciful One, * and hast led us out from the gates
of death. * Adam dances today, and Eve rejoices. * The Prophets also, along with
Patriarchs, ** praise without ceasing the divine might of Thy authority.
The Prokeimenon, in Tone III: Chant unto our God, chant ye; * chant
unto our King, chant ye.
The Verse: Clap your hands all ye nations; shout unto God with a voice of
rejoicing.
Alleluia, in Tone III: In Thee, O Lord, have I hoped; let me never be put
to shame.
The Verse: Be Thou unto me a God to defend me, and a House of refuge
to save me.