MONDAY EVENING: TONE III
AT VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 3 Stichera of compunction, in Tone III:
Spec. Mel.: “In crosswise manner ...”:
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness.
Perceiving in me a slothfulness toward profitable works, the multifarious
formed serpent transforms itself, luring me towards ever more bitter evils. By
displaying for me the sweetness of sin, through his own bitter activity which is
opposed to the commandments of God, he takes advantage of my wicked
character, and seduces me to accept evils as good.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
Having eagerly trodden the whole path of iniquity and sin, and utterly
departed from that which is straight, I have now drawn nigh to the gates of death;
and, thereby trapped, I cry aloud: О my supremely good Jesus, Thou Path of our
life, turn me to the broad expanse of true repentance; save and grant me
correction; and before my death, grant me divine forgiveness!
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
I have been slain by divers sins, by multitudes of transgressions and great
misdeeds; and I lie dead, truly helpless. Only my hope in Thy loving-kindness
remaineth alive, О Christ, Who dost grant both breath and life unto the dead and
ever slayeth the passions which kill us. Wherefore, going before me, rescue me
from everlasting death.
Then the Stichera of the saint, from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these
Stichera of the holy & great John the Forerunner, in the same tone:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
О Forerunner, who in thy birth loosed the barrenness of thy mother and the
muteness of thy father: By thy right acceptable supplications to the loving Son of
the Father, the Master and God of all, Whom the Mind dispassionately begot as
the Word, do away with the sterility of my heart and the irrationality of my soul,
and strengthen me to say and do works of love for Him.
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
Thou wast sent before the face of Christ to prepare His paths and make
straight His ways. By thy supplications and manifest help, show my heart to be
well trodden by Him. О thou who wast deemed worthy to appear at His precious
feet, grant that I may walk the ground of heaven, which the feet of the meek
tread, that with love I may honor thee as my mediator.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
On earth thou didst emulate the life of the angels, О culmination of the
prophets, first martyr of the New Covenant, who wast the first preacher to
announce to those beneath the earth that the divine Word would descend thither,
and wast borne witness to by Christ. О John the Baptist, friend of the Lamb and
Redeemer, by thy supplications deliver thy servant from all the temptations of the
enemy and from his multifarious trials.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
О blessed Mary, divinely joyous Maiden, cloud of the never-waning Light:
Shine the light of repentance upon me who am mindlessly stuck fast in the
darkness of sin; and by thy supplications deliver me from the fire of Gehenna and
the unremitting darkness, О most pure Virgin, and show me to share in the neversetting day, for I flee beneath thy protection.
Then, “О Joyous Light ...”, the Prokeimenon in Tone IV:
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him.
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou didst
hearken unto me.
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of compunction, in Tone III:
Our evening hymn do we bring unto Thee, O Christ, * with incense and
spiritual odes, ** Have mercy on us and save our souls.
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress,
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us.
Save me, O Lord my God, in so far as Thou art the salvation of all. For the
storm of the passions disquieteneth me, and the yoke of my transgressions
weigheth heavily upon me. Stretch out Thy helping hand and lead me up to the
light of compunction, for Thou alone art compassionate and the Lover of
mankind.
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.
To the Martyrs: Great is the power of Thy martyrs, О Christ; for while lying in
their graves they drive evil spirits away; and, having struggled for piety with their
faith in the Trinity, they abolished the authority of the enemy.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
O Theotokos - holy among women, thou Mother unwedded: entreat the King
and God Whom thou didst bear, that He save us, insofar as He is the Lover of
mankind.
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion through Our
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal.
MONDAY NIGHT: TONE III
AT COMPLINE
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos
ODE I
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree,
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified.
Having lived out my life in slothfulness, I have drawn nigh unto the end of my
life; yet do thou thyself, О most pure one, if but one last time, grant me
compunction, I pray, that I may weep bitterly over my countless transgressions.
With the passions of my flesh, О Virgin, I have mindlessly defiled the beauty
of the divine image, and am afraid of God’s displeasure and the terrible threat of
fire; yet do thou thyself have mercy upon me who flee to thee.
Glory ..., Falling to my knees, wretch that I am, I beg thy help, О most holy
Virgin: hearken thou to my pain-wracked soul, and by the radiance of thy prayers
dispel the cloud of grief which weighs heavily upon me.
Now & ever ..., Grant that the furrows of my passion-plagued soul may be
watered abundantly with tears, and grant that I may produce fruit an hundredfold,
О Lady; and fill my heart with all manner of gladness, that I may glorify thee.
ODE III
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in
Thy love.
О good Theotokos, grant me a torrent of tears, and thereby quench the
furnace of my passions, and wash away all defilement from my soul.
In iniquities have I defiled the nobility of my soul, О most pure one, and I
tremble at the thought of the interrogation, when the Word will examine the state
of my worthiness.
Glory ..., Beset now by the tempest of transgressions, I have been brought
down into the abyss of despair; yet grant me thy hand, О pure one, and lead me to
repentance.
Now & ever ..., Deliver thy servant from Gehenna and every other threat at
the hour of judgment, О most immaculate one, and cause me to share in the
kingdom of thy Son and God.
ODE IV
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’
The waters of unseemly deeds have flooded my wretched soul, О pure one;
wherefore, beset by worldly thoughts, I cry out in pain: Spurn not thy servant, О
Lady!
Noetic beasts have now mercilessly surrounded me and have striven pitilessly
to seize my lowly soul, О all-immaculate one; yet do thou, О most pure one, break
their soul-destroying jaws.
Glory ..., О all-pure Lady, be thou merciful to thy servant, I pray, and rescue
thy people from the coming threat, that we may cry out to thee in thanksgiving:
Glory to Thee, О Queen of all!
Now & ever ..., When the Bridegroom will come at night to judge the earth, О
most pure one, then be thou well-pleased that I may go forth to meet Him with a
lighted lamp, and may worship His coming.
ODE V
Irmos: The Invisible One hath appeared on earth, * and the
Unapproachable One hath willingly dwelt among mankind; * and, rising
early at dawn, we hymn Thee, * O Lover of mankind.
Many dogs have truly set themselves against me, and a horde of evil spirits
have surrounded me; yet set their counsels now at naught, О most pure one.
Having dug now a pit for me, the evil one strives to cast me into it; yet with
thy right hand, О Lady, may he fall into the pit which he hath made.
Glory ..., Let me not be denounced by the wrath of thy Son at the time of His
coming, neither let me be punished by His anger, О all-hymned one; but save me
by thine entreaties.
Now & ever ..., Behold my weakness, behold the lowliness of my soul, О pure
one, and the uprising of mine incorporeal enemies; and deliver me from their
harm.
ODE VI
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit
perisheth. * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me.
At the behest of the Creator of all, when my soul must needs part from the
flesh, О all-immaculate and all-hymned Theotokos, free me from the hands of
those who hate me.
With streams of compunction dry up the turbulent rivers of my wicked deeds,
О Birthgiver of God, and guide me to the waters of tranquility on the day of
judgment.
Glory ..., Thou knowest the weakness of my soul, the feebleness of my mind
and the infirmity of my flesh, О most pure one. Wherefore, save thy servant, for
thee have I acquired as an invincible ally.
Now & ever ..., Grant me streams of spiritual tears, О most immaculate Lady,
whereby I may wash away the mire of my transgressions, the tumult of the
passions and the defilement of my body.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone III:
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:
О Lady who bore the Merciful One within thy womb, have pity on me who
flee beneath thy protection and with all my soul ask thy divine help, and grant
mercy unto me when we will stand before the Author of creation, О pure one,
and deliver me from everlasting fire and all condemnation.
ODE VII
Irmos: Of old the three children did not worship the golden image, * of the
Persian idol, * but chanted in the midst of the furnace: * O God of our
fathers, blessed art Thou!
The waters of transgressions have been poured out upon me and my soul
drowns, O pure one, and the uttermost abyss hath engulfed me; yet rescue me
from its threefold billows.
Sprinkle me with the blood which flowed from the side of thine Offspring and
by the multitude of thy mercies; wash thou and cleanse me of all defilement with
streams of tears.
Glory ..., Grant thou contrition to my soul and humility to my heart, О allpure one, that I may be delivered from all the wiles of those who ever pitilessly
pursue me.
Now & ever ..., As thou art merciful, О Lady Mother of God, grant mercy to
those who with faith cry out to thy Son: О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!
ODE VIII
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him
throughout all ages.
With the might of thy Son thou hast broken the arrows of the archer, О pure
one. Let his unrighteousness now descend upon his own head, that I may cry out:
All ye works of the Lord, hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the
ages!
With thy light do thou illumine my darkened heart, О Maiden, and with the
sword of light open thou the portals of light to me who cry: All ye works of the
Lord, hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!
Glory ..., Falling into the sleep of death, I lie in the grave of despondency; yet
do thou thyself raise me up, О Virgin, and grant that I may chant with vigilance:
All ye works of the Lord, hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the
ages!
Now & ever ..., О pure one, cease thou never to pray for those who honor
thee, that, delivered in compunction from the snares of the devil, we may cry out
to thy Son: All ye works of the Lord, hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him
throughout the ages!
ODE IX
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern
a figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to
God. * Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the
beginningless Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not
known a man.
The turbulence of the passions and the turmoil of vile thoughts bestorm my
soul, and evil men ever smite me like a tempest; yet as thou lovest mankind, О
Virgin, quickly deliver me from my besetting needs
О my lowly soul, leave off thy wicked deeds and cease from doing evil and
angering God; but earnestly embrace His commandments, for thou hast the
Theotokos directing thy ways.
Glory ..., As thou hast given birth to the Lord of all, free me from the passions
and from grievous sins, and in thy surpassing loving-kindness enrich me wholly
with good works, that, rejoicing, I may magnify thee, О all-immaculate one.
Now & ever ..., The end approacheth, О my soul, judgment is at the door!
Forsake thy shameful works and undertake to live a good life; for thou hast the
Theotokos as thine ally, delivering thee from all oppression.
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ...,
Troparion. The rest as usual, and the dismissal.
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE III
AT MATINS
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,
The Sessional hymns of compunction, in Tone III:
О my soul, while sojourning on the earth, repent, for dust doth not chant in
the grave, nor doth it deliver us from transgressions; but cry out to Christ God: О
Thou Who knowest the heart of man, I have sinned against Thee! Before Thou
condemnest me, have pity, О God, and have mercy upon me.
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy
wrath.
How long, О my soul, shalt thou remain in thine offenses? How long shalt
thou put repentance aside? Be thou mindful of the coming judgment, and cry out
to Christ God: О Thou Who knowest the heart of man, I have sinned! О sinless
Lord, have mercy upon me!
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Thou art our refuge and strength O Theotokos, the mighty help of all the
world: by thy supplications do thou protect thy servants from every want, O thou
who alone art blessed
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone III:
At the dread judgment I shall denounce myself, there being no need for
accusers, and shall condemn myself, there being no need for witnesses; for the
books of my conscience will be opened, and the things I have done in secret will
be exposed. Wherefore, О God Who wilt examine my deeds at that universal trial,
cleanse me and save me.
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy
wrath.
Thou knowest the depth of mine offenses, О Lord. Grant me a helping hand,
as Thou didst to Peter, and save me.
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.
To the Martyrs: Ye shine forth in faith, О all-radiant beacons, holy physicians
of the infirm, all-praised passion-bearers; for ye were undaunted by the wounds
inflicted by the torturers and cast down the ungodliness of the idols, having the
Cross as a truly invincible trophy.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Accept me who with faith flees beneath thy protection, О Lady, and despise
me not, neither disdain me who entreat thee in repentance, О good one. Receive
the supplication which cometh from mine unworthy mouth, and by thy mediation
deliver me from all snares, that I may cry out to thee with boldness: Rejoice, О
joyous one!
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone III:
Fleeing under thy protection, we cry out with faith from the depths of our
heart: О divinely blessed Prophet and Forerunner, quell the tumults of perils and
misfortunes and the waves of infirmities, and foil the wily counsels of the enemy,
asking great mercy for us.
Shaking off thy despondency by repentance before thy departure, О wretched
soul, turn thou with weeping, crying out to the innocent Jesus, the Lover of
mankind: I have sinned against Thee, О Master, but in that Thou art full of
loving-kindness, save me by the prayers of the holy Forerunner, in that Thou
alone art sinless.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Beyond understanding and unapproachable is the dread mystery of God
wrought in thee, O divinely joyous Lady; for having conceived the Infinite One,
thou didst give birth to Him, clad in the flesh taken from thy most pure blood.
Him do thou ever entreat as thy Son, O pure one, that our souls be saved.
Canon of repentance, to our Lord Jesus Christ & His martyrs, the acrostic
whereof is “Hearken unto my groaning, О Word of God”, the composition
of Joseph, in Tone III:
ODE I
Irmos: Wondrous art Thou, O God, * Who gloriously workest wonders, *
Who didst fashion the earth from the abyss, * and didst cover the chariots
and save the people who sing to Thee * as our King and God.
Before the end, О ye faithful, let us weep for ourselves with all our soul. The
Bridegroom approacheth; let us light our deeds as though they were radiant lamps,
that together we may enter the divine bridal-chamber.
Repenting with all his soul, Manasseh of old was saved; for he cried out to the
one Master from the midst of his fetters. Him do thou emulate, О my soul, and
thou shalt easily find salvation.
To the Martyrs: While the divine spiritual athletes endured the blinding of their
eyes, the severing of their hands, the uprooting of their tongues, the amputation
of their feet, and the breaking of their legs and arms, they gave thanks unto Jesus
Christ.
To the Martyrs: О holy martyrs, the shrine of your relics hath been revealed to
be the cure of all of us, the faithful, whence we who ever honor you as is meet
draw forth healing of our souls and bodies.
Theotokion: О all-hymned Virgin, the noetic jar which held Christ, the Manna
of immortality: Deliver me from the bitterness of the soul-corrupting passions,
that with faith I may piously glorify thee.
Another canon, of John the Forerunner, in Tone III:
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree,
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified.
О Forerunner of the Lord, godly offspring of a barren womb: Pray to God,
that I may produce the fruits of the virtues, and loose the barrenness of my sin,
dispelling the gloom from my mind.
By faith thou wast revealed to be a star preceding the great Sun of glory on
earth, Who hath illumined the whole world. Wherefore, entreat Him, О
Forerunner, that He enlighten my soul, which hath been darkened by evil
thoughts.
Prophet, who by the divine Spirit announced beforehand to those in Hades
the Light Who was drawing nigh: By thy prayers give life to my deadened soul,
and raise me up from my transgressions as from a grave, I pray, О glorious
Forerunner.
Theotokion: With the archangels and angels, and all the saints, entreat the
Lord Who through thee revealed Himself to us, we pray, О Virgin, that we who
confess thee to be the true Theotokos may be delivered from misfortunes.
ODE III
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: O barren and infertile soul, * bring forth a crop of glorious fruit and
joyously cry aloud: * I have been firmly established by Thee O God; * there
is none holy and none more righteous than Thee, O Lord.
I have senselessly broken the law of God, and must needs be condemned.
And I know not what I shall do. О most righteous Judge, have pity and save me in
Thy loving-kindness.
О greatly Merciful One Who lovest mankind, Thou Dayspring of the East:
Shine forth the light of righteousness upon me, I pray, rescuing me from the
gloom of the passions and the darkness of torment.
To the Martyrs: О holy martyrs, ye have been revealed to be inhabitants of the
noetic land, fruitful trees of paradise, wellsprings of divine water, and chalices
pouring forth a holy drink.
To the Martyrs: Bearing a single character in many bodies, О passion-bearers
and martyrs, preaching the indivisible Trinity ye conquered hordes of the enemy,
and the prince of this world.
Theotokion: О most pure Virgin Mother, Sovereign Lady of all: Render Christ
merciful unto all of us, who repent and flee unto Him, and who desire to receive
release from our transgressions.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in
Thy love.
As thou art the voice of the Word, О Baptist, direct now the cries of those
who honor thee unto Him, and by thy mediation grant us remission of sins.
I have sinned against Thee and defiled my soul О Savior, having committed
iniquity and transgressions. Wherefore, I pray Thee: Have pity on me for the sake
of him who baptized Thee.
I beseech thee, О Forerunner, thou child of the desert and guide of the new
people of God; guide me to the paths of repentance, who through pleasures have
gone astray in the wilderness.
Theotokion: With the apostles, the sacred prophets, the martyrs and the
heavenly hosts pray to thy Son, О most pure one, that He have pity on us who
hymn thee.
ODE IV
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Habakkuk foresaw the overshadowed mountain, * even thine
immaculate womb, O pure one. * Wherefore he cried; God shall come forth
from Thaeman, * and the Holy One from a mountain * densely
overshadowed.
О Christ God, Who of old poured forth water from the rock for the
disobedient and gainsaying people, quenching their thirst: From my stony soul
draw forth a drop of compunction that I may be washed clean.
О Physician of the sick, as a gesture of compassion cure my heart of the
passions, applying repentance to it as a dressing of divine medicine, О Savior, in
that Thou art good, that with faith I may glorify Thee.
To the Martyrs: О passion-bearers, mercifully putting away all thought of
friendship for the body, ye gave yourselves over to those who would torture you;
wherefore, ye became close friends of the Creator.
To the Martyrs: Ye endured the agonizing wounds of multifarious torments, О
spiritual athletes of Christ, and received the grace of the gifts of the Spirit; and ye
drive away the chronic pangs of our passions.
Theotokion: Rejoice, О Maiden of great renown, from whom God the Word
was born, releasing us from irrational and unseemly deeds! Rejoice, О radiant
cloud who dispellest the clouds of our despondency!
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’
О Forerunner of the Lord, I pray thee who art the voice of the Word Who
appeared in the flesh: Deliver me from irrational actions for as is meet, I honor
thee with my words and bless thee with faith.
Sigh, О my soul, and cry out to God, thy Creator: I have sinned! Cleanse me,
О Christ, and at the entreaties of the divine Forerunner deliver me from dreadful
torment, misfortunes and tribulations.
Rescue me, who am drowning in the many waves of grievous passions, and am
cruelly beset by storms, ever foundering therein, О Baptist, and guide me to the
harbor of repentance.
Theotokion: О all-immaculate Mother of God, О chariot more exalted than
the cherubim: With the immaterial ministers and all the saints entreat Christ to
Whom thou hast given birth, that He save me, the accursed one.
ODE V
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Rising at dawn, we hymn Thee, О Word, * Thou only-begotten Son
of God. * Grant us Thy peace, and have mercy on us * who with faith hymn
and worship Thee.
Sprinkling me with the hyssop of repentance, purify me of the defilements of
the passions, О Jesus, that I may appear before Thee clean when Thou shalt judge
all mankind in Thy righteous judgment.
The wounds of my most wretched soul have festered, О Savior. О Healer of
the sick and Bestower of good things, heal Thou and save me in Thy surpassing
mercy.
To the Martyrs: On earth, the bodies of the passion-bearers were broken like
vessels of clay, but the might of their souls was wholly strengthened and illumined
by the power of Christ.
To the Martyrs: The blood which the saints shed hath sanctified the whole
earth; and given drink to the souls of the faithful, clearly drying up the surging
torrents of vanity.
Theotokion: By thy birthgiving thou didst render barren the curse upon our
forefather, О Maiden, and hast poured forth rivers of blessing upon us, who bless
and glorify thee with faith.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: The Invisible One hath appeared on earth, * and the
Unapproachable One hath willingly dwelt among mankind; * and, rising
early at dawn, we hymn Thee, * O Lover of mankind.
On earth thou didst manifestly live like an angel in the flesh, О blessed one;
wherefore, I pray to thee: Free my soul from, carnal-mindedness.
О Forerunner of the Lord, save me, who have fallen into the abyss of sin, who
have defiled my soul with pleasures, and am in distress, yet flee unto thee.
Thou wast revealed to be more exalted than the prophets, О Prophet, for thou
thyself didst see Him Whom thou didst proclaim. Him do thou unceasingly
entreat, that He enlighten our souls.
Theotokion: О divinely joyous one, who by the indwelling of the Word wast
revealed to be more spacious than the heavens: Free me from the sins which
smother me.
ODE VI
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: The abyss of the passions and a storm of adverse winds * have risen
up against me. * But do Thou make haste, O Savior, * to save me, and
deliver me from corruption, * as Thou didst deliver the Prophet from the
sea-monster.
I have been darkened by the gloom of sin and lie wholly dormant. О Christ
God, Who wast once wounded by a spear for my sake, have pity on me in Thy
tender compassion.
I groan, yet I remain sunk in evils; I weep, yet I tremble not before the
judgment; I experience pain, but remain unfeeling. О Word of God, have pity and
save me by Thy good judgments!
To the Martyrs: Wholly mute, like lambs which neither bleat nor sound, О allglorious spiritual athletes, ye were led to wounding and slaughter, hymning Christ.
To the Martyrs: With joyous soul ye were cast as food to the wild beasts and
hurled into the depths of the sea; wherefore, О spiritual athletes, Christ hath
adorned you with imperishable crowns.
Theotokion: О portal of those saved by faith, gate through which He alone
Who became incarnate for us hath entered: Open the doors of righteousness unto
us who hymn thee with faith.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit
perisheth. * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me.
In the waters thou didst baptize the Torrent of sweetness, Who bowed His
head beneath thy hand. Him do thou entreat, О wise one, that He send down the
water of compunction upon me who have greatly sinned.
In the river, О Forerunner, thou didst wash Jesus, the Lover of mankind and
Abyss of loving-kindness Who covereth the chambers of the heavens with waters.
Him do thou entreat, that He pour forth remission upon me.
“Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand!” didst thou cry aloud, О
Forerunner. Wherefore, grant that those who honor thee with love and flee
beneath thine honored protection may receive it.
Theotokion: О most pure one, who didst lend thy flesh to the Creator: With
the heavenly hosts, all the prophets, the apostles and martyrs, beseech Him to
have pity and save me.
ODE VII
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Thou didst bedew the flame of the furnace * and save the Children
from being consumed: * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, * O Lord
the God of our fathers.
I have stripped myself of the garments of incorruption and clothed myself in
deeds of ungodliness; wherefore, I cry out to Thee: О Compassionate God, make
me splendid in the raiment of the virtues.
I have sullied myself with lustful gazes and defiled myself by unseemly
touching, and am become vile in Thy sight. О Jesus, accept me as Thou didst the
prodigal!
To the Martyrs: Loving the heavenly life, ye endured many pangs, О warriors
of Christ, divine luminaries; wherefore, with faith ye are called blessed.
To the Martyrs: Having been enlightened with the splendor of martyrdom, ye
shine forth more brightly than the sun, driving away all the gloom of ungodliness,
О holy martyrs.
Theotokion: In that thou hast given birth to the Upholder of all, О pure Evervirgin Theotokos, deliver me from sin and the gloom of ignorance which holdeth
me.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: The three children in the furnace, prefiguring the Trinity: *
trampled underfoot the threat of the fire * and cried aloud, chanting: *
Blessed art Thou, О God of our fathers!
О Forerunner and Baptist of Christ, star of the Sun, my soul, which hath been
darkened and blinded by slothfulness, do thou illumine me, guiding me to the
path of repentance.
Mindful of the hour of judgment, I am wholly seized with fear; for I wallow in
a multitude of unseemly deeds. But stand forth before me, О thou who didst
baptize the Lord, and deliver me from the impending fire.
O intercessor for my life, О Forerunner my helper, preserve and protect me
from enemies, visible and invisible, and cause me to share in the heavenly
kingdom.
Theotokion: О Virgin Theotokos, with the prophets, apostles and martyrs
beseech thy Son, that from impending need He deliver us who ever honor thee.
ODE VIII
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: God is unceasingly glorified on high by the Angels, * O ye heaven of
heavens, * ye earth and mountains, ye plains and abysses, * and all the race
of mankind, * with hymns as to the Creator and Redeemer, * bless ye, and
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.
I have not the fear of Thee dwelling in my heart, and, devoid of conscience, I
have brought carnal pleasure to fulfillment; and trembling before Thy judgment,
О King of all, I beseech Thee: Disdain me not, who now repent.
Washing earthly sin from me by repentance, grant that I may pass over to the
holy land wherein the meek dwell, О greatly Merciful One Who wast born on
earth from the Virgin without sin.
To the Martyrs: Your feet, dyed in your own blood, trampled the enemy
underfoot, and in holiness now traverse the heavens, О all-glorious passionbearers of Christ, the God of all.
To the Martyrs: With care ye arrayed yourselves for struggles and great battles,
and stripped the enemy bare, clothing him in shame; wherefore, ye join chorus in
the heavens, О glorious crowned passion-bearers.
Theotokion: Loving thee, the beauty of Jacob, the Lord, Who is beauteous in
comeliness, made His abode within thy womb, О all-immaculate one, enlightening
human nature with beauties and gifts transcending understanding.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him
throughout all ages.
Thou didst preach the Lamb of God Who taketh away our sins, О godly John
the Forerunner. Him do thou beseech, that He loose the burden of my sins and
grant unto me the portion of the saved.
From the furnace of burning flame and the outer darkness which is devoid of
light deliver me who am wholly held fast in the darkness of evil deeds, for the sake
of Thy glorious and divine Baptist, I pray Thee, О Word of God, Who art wholly
without beginning.
О divine Prophet of the Lord, who through repentance preached fruitfulness
to empty and barren souls: Clear my thorn-choked soul of all the pleasures, that I
may produce the grain of good works.
Theotokion: As thou art the Mother of God, with the holy angels, the
prophets, apostles and martyrs pray that those who ever confess thee to be the
Theotokos may be delivered from misfortunes, tribulations, and all the torments
which are to come.
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...”, and make prostrations.
ODE IX
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Blessed is the Lord God of Israel, * Who hath exalted the horn of
our salvation * in the house of David His child, * for the sake of His lovingkindness; * the Dayspring from on high hath therein visited us, * guiding
us to the path of peace.
Now is the right acceptable time and the day of purification! Turn, О my soul,
and make it thy will henceforth to bring forth fruits of repentance, lest the dread
axe of death find thee barren and, having cut thee down like the fig-tree of old,
sendeth thee into the fire.
Like the rich man of old I wallow in pleasures, lacking any great love for my
neighbor; and I am not frightened by the unquenchable fire. Wherefore, soften
the hardness of my soul, О Master, that in the end I who am darkened may, if but
a little, be enlightened by loving-kindness.
To the Martyrs: Having been sealed by the divine blood of Christ, mightily
suffering lashings with faith, О martyrs, ye have laid low the infidel foe and
rescued many people from vile delusion by your divine feats, illumining them with
the light of the knowledge of God
To the Martyrs: О godly martyrs of Christ, ye were shown to be sharp-edged
swords cutting down the hordes of the enemy, vessels containing the radiance of
the Holy Trinity, lamps shedding the light of piety upon the faithful, and true
warriors of the noetic Sion.
Theotokion: The prophet foresaw thee as the radiant cloud from which Christ
God, the great Sun, appeared unto us, enlightening those who before were
darkened. Beseech Him, О good one, that He dispel the clouds of my passions
and illumine me with divine light.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern
a figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to
God. * Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the
beginningless Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not
known a man.
Having entered the tabernacle of the law, thou didst richly gaze upon the
splendor of divine grace, О wise prophet, enlightening the ends of the earth and
dispelling the darkness of ignorance; wherefore, we honor thee.
In that thou art a martyr of Christ, the godly one who baptized Him, a beacon
of repentance, the dawning of piety, the mediator between the Old and New
Covenants, enlighten my humbled soul, which hath grown old through evil,
renewing it with divine understanding.
At the hour of horror, the hour of terror, the hour of condemnation, from the
threats that await me beyond do thou deliver me who am condemned, О wise
one, for thou hast the Bridegroom, the Savior of our souls, as a friend hearkening
to thy supplications.
Theotokion: As the Mother of God, as the Mother of the Word of God Who
was born from thee in the flesh, О pure one, ever pray with the incorporeal ones,
with the apostles and prophets, the holy hierarchs and martyrs, that He have pity
on the world, О most pure Virgin Mother.
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...”, and a prostration.
Litany: Let us complete ..., Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms.
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of compunction, in Tone III:
Gather the scattered thoughts of my mind, O Lord, and purify my barren and
wasted heart, granting me repentance as didst Thou to Peter, that like the Publican
I may sigh in sorrow, and like the Harlot shed tears, that I may cry with a loud
voice unto Thee: Save me, O God, for Thou alone art compassionate and the
Lover of mankind.
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons.
While offering a multitude of hymns, I am found to be sinning; for chanting
hymns with my tongue, my soul doth dwell on wicked thoughts. But do Thou, O
Christ God set both aright through repentance, and have mercy upon me.
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our
hands do Thou guide aright.
To the Martyrs: The warriors of Christ refused to be intimidated by emperors
and tyrants, and right boldly and manfully they confessed Him, the Lord God of
all, our King; and they pray for our souls.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Without seed thou didst conceive by the Holy Spirit; we glorify thee and sing
thy praises: Rejoice, O most holy Virgin!
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia.
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal.
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE III
AT LITURGY
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone III:
Thou didst banish from paradise our forefather Adam, who had broken Thy
commandment, О Christ; but Thou didst cause to dwell therein the thief who
confessed Thee on the cross, crying: Remember me, О Savior, in Thy kingdom!
I have acquired a soul defiled by the pleasures of life, and, wholly desperate, I
approach Thy compassions and earnestly cry out to Thee, О Christ, Who alone
knowest the secret things: Cleanse me in Thy loving-kindness, О Lord!
As the mediator between the Old and the New Covenants, О divine Baptist,
having renewed me who have grown old through transgressions, by thy
supplications grant that I may walk the paths of repentance without stumbling, for
they lead straight to the kingdom of Christ, О all-praised one.
To the Martyrs: Fighting the good tight, О valiant spiritual athletes, ye endured
countless myriads of pangs; and thus ye ever ease the pain of all and dispel the
harm wrought by the evil spirits. Wherefore, we glorify you with faith, О holy
ones.
Glory ..., The Unity in three Hypostases is truly light and life, the Creator of
all, Whom we glorify; for the Master and Lord is known to be the one God in
three Hypostases - the Father, the Son and the Spirit - the Unity which sustaineth all things.
Now & ever ..., О Virgin Mother, have pity on me who ever sin and anger the
good God, and by examples of repentance make me steadfast now, in that thou
art good, that, having escaped the torments which are to come, I may earnestly
hymn thy supplication, О Maiden.
On Tuesday, the Prokeimenon in Tone VII:
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord *
and shall hope in Him.
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and
like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our
God they shall blossom forth.
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he
shall not be afraid of evil tidings. 