TUESDAY EVENING: TONE III
AT VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 3 Stichera of the Cross, in Tone III:
Spec. Mel.: “Great is the power of Thy Cross ...”:
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness.
Creation was transformed by Thy crucifixion, О Word: the sun withdrew its
rays in fear and the veil of the temple was rent in twain; and every one of the
faithful is saved. Wherefore, we glorify Thine immeasurably abundant noetic
riches.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
God the Master, Who in His compassion assumed our flesh, having been wellpleased to be nailed to the Tree, and lifted up thereon bodily, hath thereby, in the
tender compassion of His mercy, raised us up who were cast down.
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
The world was renewed by the drops of divinely shed blood and water which
flowed from Thy side, О Lord; for Thou dost wash away all sins with water, and
as Thou art compassionate, dost grant us to partake of forgiveness by Thy blood.
Then the Stichera of the saint, from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these
Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
Lying upon the bed of my negligence, I have reached the end of my Life in
slothfulness; and I fear the hour of my departure. Yet, rousing me to repentance
by thy supplication, О Maiden, save me.
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
Heal thou the sicknesses of my heart, bringing an end to the deception of my
mind, О pure one, and grant that with a pure heart I may hymn thee, and ask
grace, and find mercy on the day of judgment.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
Cast off the heavy burden of evil, and draw nigh, weeping and crying aloud: О
pure Virgin, grant that I may bear the easy yoke of thy Son and God.
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: A sword pierced thy heart, O most pure one, * when thou
didst behold thy Son upon the Cross; * whereupon thou didst cry aloud: * “Show
me not to be childless, O my Son and my God, ** Thou Who hast kept me a
Virgin even after birthgiving!”
Then, “О Joyous Light ...”, the Prokeimenon in Tone I:
Prokeimenon: Thy mercy, O Lord, shall pursue me * all the days of my life.
Verse: The Lord is my shepherd, and I shall not want. In a place of green
pasture, there hath He made me to dwell.
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Cross, in Tone III:
I bow down, О Christ, before Thy precious Cross: the guardian of the world,
the salvation of us sinners, the great purification and boast of the whole world.
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress,
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us.
The tree of disobedience put forth death for the world; but the Tree of the
Cross hath put forth life and incorruption. Wherefore, we worship the crucified
Lord, crying: Let the light of Thy countenance be signed upon us!
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.
To the Martyrs: The prophets, the apostles of Christ and the martyrs
enlightened and taught the erring nations to hymn the consubstantial Trinity, and
made the children of mankind companions of the angels.
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Spec. Mel.: “Great is the power of Thy Cross ...”:
Stavrotheotokion: When Thy Mother, the unblemished Ewe-lamb who gave
birth to Thee, saw Thee lifted up upon the Cross, О my Christ, she lamented and
cried out, weeping: “Show me not to be childless, whom Thou didst preserve pure
even after giving birth!”
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion through Our
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal.
TUESDAY NIGHT: TONE III
AT COMPLINE
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos
ODE I
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree,
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified.
Knowing thee, the Mother of God, to be a wellspring of loving-kindness and
mercy, approaching thy goodness, I pray: Grant me compunction, that I may
grieve and weep over my transgressions, О all-pure Lady.
Grant me drops of spiritual tears to wash away all the defilement of my acts
and wicked thoughts, to cleanse my soul of impurity and make me a temple of the
divine Spirit.
Glory ..., Beset by the waves and threefold billows of my transgressions, and
ever cruelly drowned by the works of the adversary, sinking now into the abyss of
destruction, I cry to thee, О most immaculate one: Save me!
Now & ever ..., For the sake of thy tender compassion, О Lady of all, have
mercy on my wretched soul, and deliver me from everlasting fire and the assault
of the demons, for I flee now beneath thy protection, О Theotokos.
ODE III
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in
Thy love.
With divine light illumine my mind, which hath been darkened by evil
thoughts, О all-hymned one; for thou hast given birth to the everlasting Light
Who hath shone forth from the Father.
Tripping the feet of my soul, the enemy of the righteous hath caused me to fall
to the ground; yet with thy right hand, О pure Lady, raise me up again.
Glory ..., With the voice of the publican I cry to thee, wretch that I am:
Cleanse me, О Lady, and by thy supplication grant remission of sins unto thy
servant.
Now & ever ..., Heal thou the wounds of my soul, О Lady, and still the most
turbulent waves of my thoughts; and grant me the armor of peace.
ODE IV
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’
I have defiled my flesh with pleasures and luxuries, and have besmirched the
purity of my soul with vile thoughts, darkening my mind. О Lady, disdain not thy
servant.
Be thou my deliverance, refuge and might, the horn of my salvation, О pure
helper, ever delivering me from all sorrow and putting all mine enemies to shame.
Glory ..., I am now beset by many perils, wretch that I am, and am ever
engulfed by the wiles of the demons; yet I flee to thee now; by thy fervent
supplication save me, thy servant.
Now & ever ..., The night of the passions, devoid of light, embraceth me,
wretch that I am; yet by thy light, О good one, dispel the clouds of my soul and
guide me to the light of the precepts of God, О all-immaculate one.
ODE V
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high *
borne aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have
foreseen God made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the
King of peace.’
The time of my life hath vanished like smoke, and I have arrived at the
gateway of death. I fear the assault of the demons, for I have ever done their
works. О all-immaculate one, have pity and save me!
Drying up the abyss of mine evils, О Virgin, grant me rivers of tears. Quench
all the flame of my passions, О Maiden, and grant that I may be delivered from
fire and other torments on the day of judgment.
Glory ..., With the oil of thy mercy heal my soul which is tormented with the
pain of my sins, and grant that I may ever observe the precepts of thy Son in
humility, that I may receive His goodness.
Now & ever ..., “Thy divine Church, stripped of its bridal raiment, О my Son,
hath been arrayed in the holy blood which flowed from Thy side. And I,
beholding all Thy pain on the Cross, do likewise suffer!” said the Mother of the
Word, lamenting.
ODE VI
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit
perisheth. * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me.
The Son of God, assuming flesh from thy pure blood, hath shown thee, О
Bride of God, to be a great refuge; wherefore, be thou merciful to thy servants.
О good one, with thy radiance illumine the eyes of my heart which have been
darkened by unseemly thoughts; make me a child of the Light, and cause me to
dwell in a place of light.
Glory ..., Waves of passionate thoughts ever batter me, О most pure one, and
the tempests of the evil spirits engulf me; yet set me firmly upon the rock of
dispassion.
Now & ever ..., I have fallen asleep in the death of my soul, and lie in the grave
of despondency; but grant me thy hand, I pray, and raise me up, guiding me to the
life of repentance.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone III:
We who have acquired the Cross of thy Son as a staff of power, О Theotokos,
thereby cast down the arrogance of the enemy, magnifying thee unceasingly with
love.
ODE VII
Irmos: Of old the three children did not worship the golden image, * of the
Persian idol, * but chanted in the midst of the furnace: * O God of our
fathers, blessed art Thou!
О pure one, with strength do thou gird my soul, which hath grown weak
through sins, and save me who cry out to thy Son: О God of our fathers, blessed
art Thou!
Fearing the hour of death because of eternal and everlasting torment, I fall
down before thee: О Lady, Birthgiver of God, save me from the snares of those
who pursue me!
Glory ..., О Theotokos who didst contain the infinite God within thy womb,
free my mind, which hath been confined by many transgressions, from their
condemnation.
Now & ever ..., The race of mankind entreateth thee, О Theotokos: О Lady,
have mercy on thy servants who with faith cry out to thy Son: О God of our
fathers, blessed art Thou!
ODE VIII
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him
throughout all ages.
Having truly emulated the prodigal and ended my whole life in sins, I now cry
out: I have sinned against thee! О Lady, make me as one of the hirelings of thy
Son and Creator, that I may glorify thee throughout all ages!
My soul hath been filled with evils, and I have been reckoned with all who go
down into the pit; yet do thou, О Virgin Theotokos, lead me up from the pit of
the passions and from the miry clay of mine evils.
Glory ..., Pray thou to Christ, О Theotokos who hast given birth to Him from
thy holy womb, that He grant me forgiveness of my manifold transgressions, that
I may chant: О all ye works of the Lord, hymn the Lord, and supremely exalt Him
throughout the ages!
Now & ever ..., When my soul must needs depart from this life at the
command of God, from the snares of those who pursue us, О most pure one,
rescue those who cry out to thee: О all ye works of the Lord, hymn the Lord, and
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!
ODE IX
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern
a figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to
God. * Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the
beginningless Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not
known a man.
The race of mankind, now enriched by thine invincible supplication, О most
immaculate one, crieth out day and night: Cease thou never to entreat thy Creator
and Son, that He take pity on those who hymn thee.
The darts of unseemly passions have wounded my soul with demonic assaults,
and ever trouble my mind with the arrows of adverse thought; wherefore, heal
mine incurable wounds, О Maiden.
Glory ..., О pure Bride of God, quickly remove from me the wounds inflicted
upon me by the enemies who war against me, for, wretch that I am, I can no
longer bear their assaults, their great wickedness and insolence; yet hasten thou to
deliver me.
Now & ever ..., Thou knowest the weakness of my lowly body, the wounds of
my soul, the groaning of my heart, and the error and deception of my mind;
wherefore by thy tender compassion grant me healing of them all.
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ...,
Troparion. The rest as usual. Dismissal.
ON WEDNESDAY MORNING: TONE III
AT MATINS
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,
the Sessional hymns of the Cross, in Tone III:
The Cross was planted in the earth yet touched the heavens, not because it
reached the full stature of a tree, but because thereon Thou didst fulfill all things.
Glory be to Thee, О Lord!
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; *
for He is holy.
Thou wast uplifted upon the cypress, the pine and the cedar, О Lamb of God,
that Thou mightest save those who worship Thy voluntary crucifixion with faith.
Glory be to Thee, О Christ God!
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: Having obtained the Cross of thy Son as a staff of strength,
O Theotokos, therewith we cast down the arrogance of the enemy, and with love
unceasingly magnify thee.
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone III:
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:
О Lord Who wast buffeted for the race of mankind, yet wast not stirred to
wrath, free our life from corruption, and save us.
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in the
midst of the earth.
Beholding Thine infinite authority and voluntary crucifixion, the angelic
armies marveled: How is He who is invisible wounded in the flesh, desiring to
deliver mankind from corruption? Wherefore, we cry out to Thee as the Bestower
of life: Glory to Thy loving-kindness, О Christ!
In the same melody:
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.
To the Martyrs: Arraying yourselves in the full armor of Christ, and wielding
the sword of faith, as martyrs ye hewed down hordes of the enemy; for, in hope
of life, ye earnestly endured all the threats and wounds of the tyrants of old.
Wherefore, ye have received crowns, О stouthearted martyrs of Christ.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., in the same melody:
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure unwedded Mother, O Christ, upon seeing Thee
hanging dead upon the Cross, said, weeping maternally: “How hath the iniquitous
and thankless council of the Jews repaid Thy many and great wonders, O my Son,
Thou Who hast filled them with Thy gifts? I hymn Thy divine condescension!” 
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone III:
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:
Accepting crucifixion and death, О Christ our Savior, Thou didst pour forth
immortal life upon us and freed the world from corruption. Wherefore, О
Bestower of life Who lovest mankind, we glorify Thy salvific sufferings, whereby
all of us who possess Thy Cross as peace and an invincible weapon, are saved.
Thou didst endure the infamy of the Cross, О Master Who dost transcend all
creation, that Thou mightest honor me who before was in grievous dishonor. And
Thou wast pierced in Thy side by a spear, О Long-suffering One, desiring to
deliver me, Thy creature, from corruption. I hymn Thy great tender compassion
and goodness, О Lover of mankind!
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: When the pure Virgin, Thine immaculate Mother, who
knew not wedlock, beheld Thee uplifted upon the Tree, О Master, she cried
aloud: “Woe is me, О my most sweet Son! How hath the most iniquitous council
condemned Thee, the Creator and Master of all, to the Tree? I hymn Thine utter
goodness!”
ODE I
Canon of the precious & life-creating Cross, the acrostic whereof is “By
Thy pangs Thou hast brought an end to the pangs of men”, the
composition of Joseph, in Tone III:
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree,
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified.
Thou didst cause the greatly painful passions to cease, О Word, and didst save
mankind, whom the adversary wounded of old, yet who piously worship Thine
ineffable dispensation.
He who by deceit bound us through the violation of the commandment in
paradise is bound by the unbreakable bonds wherewith Thou wast bound, having
become incarnate of Thine own will, О Lord and Lover of mankind, loosing our
transgressions.
To the Martyrs: Seeing creation unfortunately overwhelmed by the deceptions
of the demons, the passion-bearers of great renown revealed themselves to be
calm harbors for the faithful, drowning all the power of the prideful one in the
streams of their blood.
To the Martyrs: The choirs of the martyrs, having radiantly joined the ranks on
high, are ever illumined by the splendors of the uncreated Godhead, enlightening
those on earth who with faith glorify His wonders.
Theotokion: Thou wast revealed to be more exalted than the heavenly ranks,
О most pure one, who on earth hast given birth to God the Word, Who in His
goodness hath led us up to the heavens by His sufferings and precious Cross.
Another canon, of the most holy Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is “I
offer a third hymn to the Theotokos”, in Tone III:
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters ...,
Thee whom the Prophet Habbakuk foresaw in the Spirit as the mountain
overshadowed, do I beseech: О most pure one, overshadow me who am pierced
through by passions and am in the shadow of death, that I may be freed of the
passions which assail me. (Twice)
With the sprinkling of the divine streams which flow from the divine side of
thy Son, wash clean the wounds of my heart, that, as is meet, I may magnify and
glorify thee, the ever-blessed and most immaculate one.
Thou hast given birth to the Word Who is the equal of the One Who begat
Him, and hath made the essence of man divine. Entreat Him, О pure one, that He
grant divine consolation unto me who am confused and weakened by the wiles of
the enemy.
ODE III
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in
Thy love.
By the Tree the assembly of the Jews slayed Thee, Who in the essence of Thy
divinity art dispassionate, yet in Thy goodness became subject to suffering in the
flesh, rendering us immortal.
О Word Who suspended the earth upon the waters, of Thine own will Thou
wast suspended upon the Tree, leading up to the heavens me who have fallen into
the pit of evil.
To the Martyrs: Replete with wounds, O all-praised martyrs of Christ, ye stand
before the Lord, receiving rewards from His most generous hand.
To the Martyrs: With joyous soul the martyrs received wounds, bringing utter
grief upon the serpent and filling the angelic choirs with joy.
Theotokion: Beholding Christ uplifted upon the Cross, she who knew not
wedlock said, weeping: “O Sun of glory, Thou hast set from before mine eyes,
bringing light to those in darkness!”
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all ...,
О all-holy one, who art merciful, beseech Him Who is rich in ineffable mercy
and compassions, that He have pity on us who are oppressed. (Twice)
О pure Virgin, who art the dwelling-place of the Creator of all, entreat the
Comforter to abide within me, for I have become a den for soul-corrupting
thieves.
In that thou bearest in thine arms Him Who holdeth all things in His divine
hand, О Theotokos, look upon me, and deliver me from mine unseemly
inclination toward the passions.
ODE IV
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’
Beaten about the head with a reed, Thou didst endure mockery, О Master
Who dost truly surpass all honor, that Thou mayest honor me who have been
dishonored by disobedience, О Christ Who lovest mankind.
As the King of truth Thou wast crowned with a crown of thorns as Thou didst
desire, О Long-suffering One, and Thou didst uproot thorny sin. I hymn Thy
sufferings, О Savior!
To the Martyrs: О martyrs, ye remained unbroken by the infliction of wounds,
breaking the deception of the enemy and trampling underfoot him who boasted
beyond measure yet wholly fadeth away in his mindlessness.
To the Martyrs: Through your corruptible bodies ye acquired divine
incorruption, by your sufferings steadfastly emulating the honored suffering of the
Dispassionate One, О all-praised martyrs who have been reckoned with all the
incorporeal ones.
Theotokion: Once, the prophet beheld thee, О Maiden, as the scroll whereon
the finger of the Father inscribed the incarnate Word, Who with the spear hath
rent asunder the record of our forefather’s sin, О most pure one.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love ...,
As Thou didst endure wounds and slaughter, О only greatly merciful Christ, by
the supplications of her who gave birth to Thee, heal my soul, which hath been
wounded by the afflictions of the ravenous demons.
О Creator, my body is the creation of Thy hands, yet I have been broken by
the malice of the serpent and the pleasures of life. Wherefore, by the divine
supplications of her who gave birth to Thee, refashion me, О Christ,
In a manner transcending description, thou hast given birth to the Word Who
hath released mankind from all irrationality. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that
He free me who am held captive by irrational passions, О only Ever-virgin.
Thou dost ever pour forth healing upon us from thy hands, О thou who art
wholly the tabernacle of Holiness, who art wholly filled with Light, and dost
wholly exude the Myrrh of sweet savor, О most pure Bride of God.
ODE V
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: The Invisible One hath appeared on earth, * and the
Unapproachable One hath willingly dwelt among mankind; * and, rising
early at dawn, we hymn Thee, * O Lover of mankind.
Thou wast uplifted upon the Tree like a lamb, О Good One, offering Thyself
to the Father as a sacrifice for us, О Almighty, and thereby abolishing idolatrous
sacrifice.
Pierced in the side with a spear, О Bestower of life, Thou pourest forth two
streams of salvation upon those who declare Thee to be one of the Trinity, yet
having two natures.
To the Martyrs: Through faith finding Thee to be a mighty fortress and
unshakable rock, О Jesus, the mighty passion-bearers built themselves up as
priceless stones.
To the Martyrs: Strengthened by the power of God through faith, ye made war
upon all the cruel power of the deceiver, О passion-bearing martyrs, and have
been crowned with splendor.
Theotokion: In that thou hast given birth unto Christ without corruption, thou
hast refashioned our nature, which of old had become corrupt through
disobedience, О most holy Lady, thou intercessor for our souls.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high *
borne aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have
foreseen God made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the
King of peace.’
Transform the pangs of my flesh and the sickness of my soul, О Virgin; drive
away the clouds of slothfulness, О cloud of the Light; and grant deliverance from
evils unto me who petition and glorify thee with love. (Twice)
Full of every sin, О Virgin, I now present thee as my mediatress and advocate
before Him Who was born from thee. Be thou the surety and correction of life
for me, and guidance to the ways of divine knowledge.
Sanctify my mind, illumine my soul, and cause it to share in divine glory; for,
lo! I have been filled with evils and enslaved by all manner of pleasures, and I bear
a defiled conscience.
ODE VI
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit
perisheth. * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me.
The lying serpent, who deceived me with the fruit of falsehood, caused me to
be expelled from Eden; but Christ, having been willingly raised up upon the Tree
hath restored mine ancient access thereto.
By Thy wounded side, О Lord our Benefactor, he who wounded us was
wounded and remained unhealed; but we, the faithful, have been healed by the
wounds whereby Thou wast willingly wounded.
To the Martyrs: О most wise warriors of Christ, in the midst of the fire ye
showed yourselves to be like roasted lambs, offered as a banquet to the God and
King of all, inheriting ineffable gladness.
To the Martyrs: Drawing healing forth from inexhaustible treasuries, ye pour it
forth in rivers, О passion-bearers; and causing the harm of the passions to dry up,
ye give drink to the assemblies of the faithful.
Theotokion: Beholding the death of the Word Who was incarnate from thy
blood, О all-immaculate one, thou didst cry out as a mother and magnify Him
Who is the Cause of life, О Virgin Lady.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: О Lover of mankind, disdain not those * who have reached the end
of the ages * and are assailed with destruction by the threefold billows of
perils, * yet cry aloud: О Savior, save us, * as Thou didst save the prophet
from the sea monster!
Ever full of pride, I have surpassed the Pharisee in arrogance of mind,
plunging headlong into the defiles of countless offenses. О only pure one, have
pity on me who am brought grievously low. (Twice)
O thou whose conceiving and birthgiving were most wondrous, show now thy
mercies to be wondrous in me; for I have been conceived in iniquities and born a
slave to pleasures.
I cry out, weep and lament when I contemplate the dread judgment; for my
deeds are evil. О Virgin Mother of God, who knewest not a man, intercede for me
at the dreadful hour!
ODE VII
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: Of old the three children did not worship the golden image, * of the
Persian idol, * but chanted in the midst of the furnace: * O God of our
fathers, blessed art Thou!
By Thy pangs Thou didst cause our pangs to cease, О Lover of mankind, and
thou hast now brought to the life devoid of pain those who piously worship Thine
honored sufferings, О God of all.
When creation saw Thee crucified, О Christ, it quaked and trembled: the earth
shook, the rocks split asunder, and the sun in its transit hid its light.
To the Martyrs: Submitting to the laws of Christ, the martyrs rejected the
enticements of the iniquitous and, suffering in the midst of the tribunal, received
crowns of glory.
To the Martyrs: Possessed of a will hotter than fire, ye were not consumed by
the fire, О crowned passion-bearers of the Lord, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou,
О God!
Theotokion: Seeing Christ, to Whom thou hast given birth, lifted up upon the
Cross, О most pure one, thou didst stand, crying out: “Show me not to be
childless, whom Thou didst keep pure even after birthgiving!”
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: The three children in the furnace, prefiguring the Trinity: *
trampled underfoot the threat of the fire * and cried aloud, chanting: *
Blessed art Thou, О God of our fathers!
My works are of no avail for salvation, О Lady, for I heap sin upon sin, and
evil upon evil. Wherefore, by thy prayers, О pure one, have pity and save me.
(Twice)
The trial is at hand, the judgment-seat is set forth in readiness. Prepare thyself,
О my soul, and cry aloud: When Thou shalt sit in judgment, O Word, condemn
me not, for the sake of the prayers of her who gave birth to Thee.
Harvesting the fruits of sin and bringing forth a barren soul, I have been slain;
yet I cry unto thee: Show me to be fruitful, О thou who by thy Fruit hast
destroyed corruption.
ODE VIII
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: The Babylonian furnace burnt not the children, * neither did the fire
of the Godhead consume the Virgin, * wherefore with the faithful children
we cry aloud: * 'Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord'.
When Thou wast crucified, paradise was opened again, and the sword which
was wielded against us was withdrawn, putting to shame the spear which pierced
Thy holy side, О greatly merciful Christ.
The adversary was wounded by Thy spear and fell, and fallen Adam is
returned to life, crying out to Thee Who wast willingly slain, О Christ: I glorify
Thee Who givest blessings, О my greatly merciful God!
To the Martyrs: The world is illumined by your contests, О spiritual athletes,
and by your prowess and countless miracles, is delivered from the darkness of
pain, crying out with faith: Bless the Lord, О ye works of the Lord!
To the Martyrs: He who of old boasted that he would destroy the earth and
the sea is seen lying in humiliation beneath your feet, О saints; and with His lifebearing right hand Christ adorneth you with imperishable crowns, О ever-glorious
ones.
Theotokion: О most pure one, thou hast given birth in time unto Him Who
transcendeth time, Who by His bonds freeth first-formed Adam from the bonds
of time, and bindeth him to Himself with the bonds of His sweet love.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him
throughout all ages.
As thou wast wholly beautiful and didst become close to the King of all, О
Theotokos, with good works fill me who have lived in wickedness and
slothfulness, and have come to the end of my life, that I may glorify thee
throughout all ages. (Twice)
As of old Thou didst most gloriously deliver the prophet from the belly of the
whale, О Word of God, deliver also my soul, which hath stumbled headlong into
the abyss of destruction, О Savior, having the Virgin, who gave Thee birth
without knowing wedlock, praying to Thee.
Those who do evil, finding me clothed in the beautiful raiment of divine birth,
have stripped me of it, О Theotokos; but by repentance do thou array me in
divine vesture by thy supplications, О Virgin.
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...”, and make prostrations.
ODE IX
Canon of the Cross
Irmos: Unto her who was prefigured on Sinai in the bush and the flame *
before Moses the lawgiver, * she who conceived the fire of God within her
womb without being consumed, * the most radiant and inextinguishable
lamp, * the very Theotokos, thee do we honor and magnify with hymns.
That Thou mightest find the coin which Thou hadst lost, О good Christ,
Thou didst set Thy flesh afire on the Cross; making Thy heavenly hosts partakers
of Thy joy, О Bestower of life, with them we hymn Thee as our Benefactor,
magnifying Thee in song.
As Thou didst lift up Thy hands upon the Cross, О Christ, with Thy power
Thy didst strengthen my hands, which before were weakened by many passions;
fortifying my truly weak knees to run the divine race: Wherefore, I glorify Thee.
To the Martyrs: Burning with flame, through countless wounds Thy steadfast
and wondrous spiritual athletes found Thee to be a dew of coolness; wherefore,
rejoicing, they trod the path with desire for honors, unceasingly magnifying thee
with hymns.
To the Martyrs: The multitude of spiritual athletes, the choir of the saints,
entreat Thee, О Christ, on behalf of the assembly of those who have greatly
offended Thee. In the multitude of Thy mercy, О Compassionate One, cleanse us
of the multitude of our iniquities, in that Thou lovest mankind.
Theotokion: О Virgin, thou hast given birth to the Effulgence of the Father,
Who beareth the guise of mortals. When the sun beheld Him lifted up upon the
Cross, it dimmed its rays, unable to bear the sight, but the gloom of the madness
of idolatry faded. Wherefore, with it we magnify thee.
Canon of the Theotokos
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern
a figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to
God. * Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the
beginningless Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not
known a man.
O incorrupt and immaculate Virgin, disdain me not who am corrupt of mind
and depraved of soul and conscience, who am defiled by evil and appear stripped
bare of all good deeds; but do thou adorn me with works of piety.
I have been filled with evils, filled with thoughts which alienate me from Thee
the Lover of mankind; wherefore, I groan and cry aloud: Accept me, the penitent,
and by the prayers of her who gave birth to Thee, reject me not, О greatly
merciful Benefactor.
That I may be delivered by thy prayers from all wrath, the deadly passions,
cruel Gehenna and fire, from unjust men and wicked enemies, О all-immaculate
Maiden, I have fled to thy protection and call upon thee for help.
In that thou art the Mother of God, beseech the Lord God and King, that I,
thy servant, who from my mother’s womb have set my hope on thee, may be
delivered from every threat and wicked habit, О Lady.
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...”, and a prostration.
Litany: Let us complete ..., Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms.
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Cross, in Tone III:
Coveting bliss, I was banished, suffering a great fall; yet Thou didst not despise
me, О Master: for, assuming what is mine for my sake, Thou wast crucified and
saved me, leading me into glory. О my Redeemer, glory be to Thee!
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons.
On the mountain, lifting up his arms in the form of the Cross, Moses
vanquished Amalek; and Thou, О Savior, stretched out upon the precious Cross,
embraced me, saving me from slavery to the enemy, and didst give it to me as the
sign of life, enabling me to escape the arrows of mine adversaries. Wherefore, О
Word, I bow down before Thy precious Cross.
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our
hands do Thou guide aright.
To the Martyrs: Having fought the good fight, even after death ye shine in the
world like beacons, О holy martyrs; wherefore, possessed of boldness, entreat
Christ to have mercy on our souls.
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee hanging upon the Tree, О mine supremely
good Christ, the all-immaculate one cried out, lamenting maternally: “O my most
beloved Son, how hath the iniquitous council condemned Thee to the Tree?”
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia.
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal.
ON WEDNESDA Y MORNING: TONE III
AT LITURGY
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone III:
Thou didst banish from paradise our forefather Adam, who had broken Thy
commandment, О Christ; but Thou didst cause to dwell therein the thief who
confessed Thee on the cross, crying: Remember me, О Savior, in Thy kingdom!
Thou wast crucified and pierced in the side for my sake, О my Jesus, Who
pourest forth upon me a twofold stream of salvation; wherefore, saved by Thy
suffering, О Christ, I hymn and glorify Thy loving-kindness. In Thy kingdom,
remember me who cry out aloud.
Reckoned among the iniquitous, О Jesus, Thou didst take away the iniquities
of us all; and crowned with thorns as the King of all, Thou dost cut off the thorns
of the sin of our forefather at the root; wherefore, we now glorify Thy suffering
with faith.
To the Martyrs: О valiant spiritual athletes, all-glorious martyrs, who emulated
the sufferings of Christ and with divine power cast down the deception of the
enemy: Ye have received heavenly glory, О saints, praying for us all.
Glory ..., О Unity of three Hypostases, indivisible and all-accomplishing
Trinity, single Essence and Power: From all the harm wrought by the enemy
protect those who hymn Thee, and grant us Thy kingdom, which those who live
virtuously receive.
Now & ever ..., Beholding on the Cross Him Who took flesh of thy pure
blood, О Maiden Birthgiver of God, thou didst cry out, weeping: “How hath the
wicked assembly rewarded Thee, slaying Thee, the life and resurrection of all the
faithful?”
On Wednesday, the Prokeimenon in Tone III:
Prokeimenon, the Hymn of the Theotokos, in Tone III: My soul doth
magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the
name of the Lord.