TONE FOUR
ON SATURDAY EVENING
AT LITTLE VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 4 Stichera:
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone IV:
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
Unceasingly worshiping Thy life-giving Cross, O Christ God, * we glorify Thy
Resurrection on the third day, * for through it, O All-powerful one, * Thou hast
renewed corrupted human nature * and shown us the way to heaven, ** since
Thou alone art good and the Lover of mankind.
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
Unceasingly worshiping Thy life-giving Cross, O Christ God, * we glorify Thy
Resurrection on the third day, * for through it, O All-powerful one, * Thou hast
renewed corrupted human nature * and shown us the way to heaven, ** since
Thou alone art good and the Lover of mankind.
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
By being willingly nailed to the tree of the Cross, O Savior, * Thou hast abolished
the penalty of the tree of disobedience; * and by descending into Hades, O Allpowerful one, * as God Thou hast torn asunder the bonds of death. * Wherefore
we worship Thy Resurrection from the dead, and we cry out with joy: ** O Allpowerful Lord, glory be to Thee!
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
Thou hast shattered the gates of Hades, O Lord, * and by Thy death Thou
hast destroyed the dominion of death; * delivering mankind from corruption, *
granting the world life, incorruption, ** and great mercy.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:
Thou didst conceive without seed, * and ineffably didst thou bear the One
who hath cast down the mighty from their thrones * and hath exalted the humble
raising the horn of His faithful, * who glorify the Cross, the Tomb and the
glorious Resurrection of Christ. * Wherefore, O Theotokos, with never silent
hymns we call thee blessed, * the source of such a great wealth of goodness, ** do
thou ever intercede that our souls be saved.
Then “O Joyous Light ...”:
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...”, with its verses.
After “Vouchsafe O Lord ...”:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Theotokos, in Tone IV:
O Lord, by ascending the Cross * Thou hast wiped out our ancestral curse, *
and by descending into Hades * Thou hast set free those enchained therein from
all ages, * granting incorruption to mankind; * wherefore with hymns we glorify **
Thy life-giving and saving Arising.
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation.
God, the Son begotten timelessly from the Father * who hath no beginning, *
hath through condescension become a man for the salvation of mankind, * that
He might now grant Paradise to the First-formed man. * At the same time Thou,
O Lord, hast redeemed all nature from the deception of the serpent * and thus
saved the fallen image. * As thou art one who is good and easily placated, * Thou
hast made Thy Mother the Pure undefiled Mother of the Bridegroom, ** and
whom we have all gained as the anchor of our souls.
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear; * and forget
thine own people and thy father’s house.
Thou didst hold in thy womb, O divinely blessed one, * the incarnate Creator
of all things * as He refashioned mankind, * which through the serpent had once
fallen by the transgression. * For thou hast given birth ineffably to our God in the
flesh, * and through thy birthgiving thou hast freed from corruption, * the nature
of that which had become corrupt. * Therefore we praise and glorify thy grace, *
O Virgin unwedded, ** cease not to intercede that our souls may be saved.
Verse: The rich among the people of the land * will entreat Thy favor.
Reveal unto us all the abundance of thy mercy * and the limitless abyss of thy
loving-kindness, * by wiping away the sins of thy servants. * For as thou art the
Theotokos, O all-immaculate one, * thou hast authority over creation, * and by
thy power thou canst order all things as thou dost will; * for the grace of the holy
Spirit clearly doth dwell in thee * and with thee eternally dwelleth in all things, **
O Most blessed one.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
The Son who together with the Father and the Spirit * is glorified in the
highest by the Seraphim, * wishing to refashion the First-formed man, * ineffably
emptied His entire being into thy womb, * O all-praised Theotokos. * Dawning
forth from thee * He hath enlightened the whole world by His Godhead, * 
delivering it from the deception of idolatry, * and by this He hath rendered the
race of mankind divine, * having raising it on high to the heavens; ** Christ God
the Savior of our souls.
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion. Then:
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone IV:
Having learned the joyful proclamation of the Resurrection from the angel, *
and having cast off the ancestral condemnation, * the women disciples of the
Lord spake exultantly to the apostles: * 'Death is despoiled and Christ God is
risen, ** granting the world great mercy'.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
And the Dismissal.
AT GREAT VESPERS
On “Lord I have cried ...”, 10 Stichera: 7 Resurrection Stichera and 3 of the
Saint of the day, or 4 and 6 if the Menaion service is of Polyeleos rank.
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone IV:
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.
Unceasingly worshiping Thy life-giving Cross, O Christ God, * we glorify Thy
Resurrection on the third day, * for through it, O All-powerful one, * Thou hast
renewed corrupted human nature * and shown us the way to heaven, ** since
Thou alone art good and the Lover of mankind.
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward
me.
By being willingly nailed to the tree of the Cross, O Savior, * Thou hast
abolished the penalty of the tree of disobedience; * and by descending into Hades,
O All-powerful one, * as God Thou hast torn asunder the bonds of death. *
Wherefore we worship Thy Resurrection from the dead, and we cry out with joy:
** O All-powerful Lord, glory be to Thee!
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear
my voice.
Thou hast shattered the gates of Hades, O Lord, * and by Thy death Thou
hast destroyed the dominion of death; * delivering mankind from corruption, *
granting the world life, incorruption, ** and great mercy.
Other Stichera by Anatolius:
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication.
Come O ye peoples, let us hymn the Savior's Rising on the third day, *
whereby we were redeemed from the unbreakable bonds of Hades * obtaining
incorruption and life, as we cry aloud: * 'Thou, who wast crucified and buried and
rose again, ** save us by Thy Resurrection, O only Lover of mankind.'
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness.
Angels and mortals hymn thine Arising on the third day, O Savior, * through
which the ends of the inhabited world were filled with light, * and we were all
redeemed from the slavery of the enemy, as we cry aloud: * 'O life-giving, Allpowerful Savior, ** save us by Thy Resurrection, O only Lover of mankind.'
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my
soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
Thou hath shattered the gates of brass and smashed their bars, O Christ God,
* raising the fallen race of mankind; * wherefore with one accord we cry unto
Thee: * 'O Lord risen from the dead, ** glory be to Thee!'
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
O Lord, begotten from Thy Father without time and eternal; * Thine
incarnation from a Virgin is inexpressible for man and beyond telling; * and Thy
descent into Hades is fearful for the devil and His angels; * for having trampled
upon death Thou hast arisen on the third day, ** granting mankind incorruption
and great mercy.
Then the Stichera from the Menaion, with the following Verses:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
Glory from the Menaion, if appointed. Otherwise:
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion Dogmatic:
Prophet David, the ancestor of God, * spoke of thee in psalmody unto Him
who hath accomplished great things in thee. * For God was well pleased without
father to become a man from thee, * the Queen who standeth at His right hand, *
and He - the source of life - showed thee to be His mother, * that he might renew
his own image, corrupted by the passions. * Having found the lost sheep
wandering on the mountain * He hath laid it upon his shoulders, * that he may
bring it to his Father; * and in accordance with his own will * unite it to the
heavenly Powers * and thus, O Theotokos, save the world, ** Christ, who is richly
and abundantly merciful.
After the Entrance and “O Joyous Light ...”,
Saturday Vespers Prokeimenon, in Tone VI:
The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty.
Verse: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself.
Verse: For He established the universe which shall not be shaken.
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV:
O Lord, by ascending the Cross * Thou hast wiped out our ancestral curse, *
and by descending into Hades * Thou hast set free those enchained therein from 
all ages, * granting incorruption to mankind; * wherefore with hymns we glorify **
Thy life-giving and saving Arising.
Verse: The Lord is King, He is clothed with majesty. * The Lord is clothed
with strength and He hath girt Himself.
Hung upon a tree, O only Mighty One, * Thou didst shake the whole of
creation; * laid in a tomb Thou hast raised those who dwelt in the tombs, *
granting the race of mankind incorruption and life; * wherefore with hymns we
glorify ** thine arising on the third day.
Verse: For He established the universe * which shall not be shaken.
A lawless people, O Christ, delivered Thee to Pilate, * and condemned Thee to
be crucified, * showing themselves to be ungracious to their benefactor, * but
voluntarily enduring burial, * by thine own power Thou didst arise on the third
day as God, **granting us life everlasting and great mercy.
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, * unto length of days.
Reaching Thy tomb in tears the women sought Thee; * and when they could
not find Thee they cried aloud with grief and lamentation: * Woe unto us, our
Savior, the King of all, how wast Thou stolen? * What place doth hold Thy lifebearing body? * But an Angel answered them saying: * 'Weep not, but go, and
proclaim that the Lord hath arisen, ** granting us joy, for He alone is
compassionate.'
Glory from the Menaion, if appointed, otherwise:
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, *
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to
shame, * O Sovereign Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who
cry out to thee with faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and
the salvation of our souls!
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion. Then:
Tone IV:
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, **
for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice)
Note: If it is a regular Sunday Vigil, we chant “O Theotokos and Virgin ...”
(Thrice). If it is one of the 12 great feasts, we chant the Troparion of the feast
(Thrice). If it is a Sunday coinciding with some other feast, we chant “O
Theotokos and Virgin ...”, (Twice), and the Troparion of the Feast (Once).
And the Dismissal.
If a Vigil is not served, we chant (Once):
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone IV:
Having learned the joyful proclamation of the Resurrection from the angel, *
and having cast off the ancestral condemnation, * the women disciples of the
Lord spake exultantly to the apostles: * 'Death is despoiled and Christ God is
risen, ** granting the world great mercy'.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., the Resurrection Theotokion, in Tone IV:
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, *
hath been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate
in an uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, *
and through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from
death.
SATURDAY NIGHT: TONE IV
AT COMPLINE
The priest saith: Blessed is our God..., and we respond: Amen. Glory to Thee,
our God, glory to Thee. О heavenly King..., Trisagion through Our Father. Lord,
have mercy (12 times). Glory..., Now & ever... О come, let us worship... (Thrice).
Psalm 50 (Have mercy on me, О God...); Psalm 69 (O God, be attentive unto
helping me...); and Psalm 142 (О Lord, hear my prayer...). Then, Glory to God in
the highest..., and the Symbol of Faith (I believe in one God...).
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos, in Tone IV
ODE I
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old,
* and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the
power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.
O thou who alone art the defender amid perils and tribulations of those who
fervently flee beneath thy protection О most pure one, accept our heartfelt
supplications, in that thou art exceedingly good.
Ignorant though I am, I have found thee to be a tranquil haven repelling
dangers and violent assaults, О thou who hast given birth to the God-man, and I
chant hymns of thanksgiving unto thee.
Glory ..., Regarding me, who am stuck fast amid evil circumstances and
sorrows, with thy meek and merciful eye, О Birthgiver of God, quickly free me
from them, for I call upon thee for help.
Now & ever ..., In that thou alone art a good and merciful intercessor for thy
servants, О Lady, extend the hand of entreaty and deliver me from cruel
misfortunes for I am grievously bowed down by violent tribulations.
ODE III
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have
girded themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the
Lord.
Having acquired thee as a mighty weapon and a rampart, О Theotokos who
knewest not wedlock, I vanquish the hordes of the adversary and hymn thy
mighty works.
Thou destroyest the furnace of griefs and dost extinguish the burning heat of
despair, О Virgin Theotokos. Who then is a hope for us like unto thee?
Glory ..., Attend unto the voice of thy servant who am in need of thy help, О
Mother of God. О my hope, hearken unto me and rescue me from perils!
Now & ever ..., Oppression hath come upon us because of the multitude of
our transgressions, bearing pernicious death; but save thy servants, О Theotokos,
for thou art able so to do.
ODE IV
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the
Cross, * the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: *
Glory be to Thy power, O Lord!
Thou hast vanquished those who make war upon me in vain, for they strove
cruelly to make my soul captive. Preserve me, О Lady, have mercy upon me and
save me, for I, thy servant, flee unto thee.
Delivering me from the tongue which speaketh falsehood, О my good ally,
show me forth as unpunished for the deeds of my life, for, in that thou art the
Mother of the Creator, thou art able to accomplish much.
Glory ..., Afflicted as I am, I know thee to be a painless physician, and I cry to
thee: О Lady, heal me, have mercy on me, and save me, for I, am thy servant, and
flee unto thee.
Now & ever ..., Leave me not to be given over to tortures, О Mother of our
God, but preserve me unharmed by any affliction and the malice of men; for thou
art the helper of us all.
ODE V
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy
light turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises
in faith.
Set forth the supplication of thy servant before the Lord thy Son, О pure one,
that I may obtain, remission of my many transgressions.
Deliver me from sufferings and misfortunes, О Bride of God, for God hath
appointed thee to be true cleansing for my lowliness.
Glory ..., Thou art my protection and sure boast, О Lady Theotokos, for thou
dost in nowise spurn those who have recourse unto thee.
Now & ever ..., Have mercy upon those who worship thine Offspring, О pure
one, and deliver them from the torment and bitterness of men; for thou art able
so to do.
ODE VI
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * 'I will sacrifice unto
Thee with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the
demons' * by the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side.
О most pure Lady, thou thyself art my strength amid the exceedingly hopeless
sorrows which beset me; and I cry unto thee, for thou art a mighty protectress for
thy servant.
Heal thou my spiritual wounds, О most pure Virgin, help me, and deliver thy
servant from slander, attack and undeserved ruination.
Glory ..., Crush thou those who unjustly assail me, for I ever flee unto thee,
and leave me not to their destruction, for all things are possible for thee, О pure
one, in that thou art the Theotokos.
Now & ever ..., Quell thou the savage billows of my soul, О Lady, for a
multitude of transgressions, temptations and sorrows have risen up against me;
but do thou thyself save me.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone IV:
Darkened in mind by many transgressions, prodigal that I am, I cry out for thy
mighty aid, О Theotokos: Illumine the eyes of my soul, shine upon me the radiant
light of repentance, and thus array me in an armor of light, О pure Birthgiver of
God.
ODE VII
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.
Quickly routing the assault of the Moslems with the sword of thy prayers, О
Mary, preserve thy people and flock who cry out to thy Son: О God of our
fathers, blessed art Thou!
О thou who art equal in majesty to the tabernacle, receive me who flee to thee,
that the enemy not seize me, desiring to destroy me who cry aloud: О supremely
exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!
Glory ..., О Mary, Birthgiver of God, go thou quickly before me, thy servant,
who am drowning, helpless, amid the threefold billows of perils, and who cry to
thee: О thou hope of the ends of the earth, have mercy upon me!
Now & ever ..., By thy divine supplications, О good Theotokos, do thou
dispel my human thoughts, in that they are the cause of sins, and deliver thy
servant from painful dangers and all harm.
ODE VIII
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All
ye works bless and hymn the Lord.
An iniquitous nation hath assailed us, boasting that it will destroy thy servants;
but, destroying it, О most pure one, protect those who cry out: Bless and hymn
the Lord, all ye works.
Thy many and varied compassions mercifully save us from sinful judgment
and divers perils О only Mother of God, for, having given birth unto God, thou
takest pity on His world.
Glory ..., Since thou art our might and help, I am undaunted by the wrath of
the enemy, but I hymn thee, О Lady, and cry out to thy Son: Bless the Lord, all ye
works of the Lord!
Now & ever ..., Take pity now on my turmoil and grant me joy instead of
grief, that I may hymn thee, О Lady, and cry out to thy Son: Bless the Lord, all ye
works of the Lord!
ODE IX
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the
Offspring of thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. *
Wherefore, we all magnify thee.
Having sharpened their swords, the iniquitous and false Moslems take counsel
against us; but by the power of the Cross and thy supplications, О Virgin
Theotokos, arm thy servants against them; that we may proclaim thy glory.
Might hath been given thee against the enemy and deliverance from
misfortunes for me, О Lady, and I know not what I shall offer thee; yet accept
thou the thanksgiving which I bring to thee: Receive it now, and save me!
Glory ..., О most radiant Mother of the Creator of all, thou consolation of the
grieving, intercessor for the drowning and helper of those who are in utter
affliction: Keep me safe throughout my life!
Now & ever ..., Disdain me not who am beset by many sins and misfortunes,
О all-hymned one, for I now offer thee the sacrifice of praise, earnestly crying out
to thee: О holy Lady, help me, for I conclude my hymnody, glorifying thee.
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and the rest as usual. Dismissal.
SUNDAY MORNING: TONE IV
AT NOCTURNES
The priest saith: “Blessed is our God ...”, and we say: Amen. Glory to Thee,
our God, glory to Thee. О heavenly King... Trisagion through Our Father... Priest:
For Thine is the kingdom ..., And we say: Amen. Lord, have mercy (12 times),
Glory..., Now & ever..., О come, let us worship (Thrice). Psalm 50 (Have mercy
on me, О God...)
And then, the Canon to the Holy & Life-creating Trinity, the acrostic whereof
is “The fourth hymn unto God”, the composition of Metrophanes, in Tone IV:
ODE I
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old,
* and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the
power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.
Let us glorify the divine Trinity of hypostases, the single nature of the Three,
which is co-eternal and co-enthroned; and entreating Him, let us say: Save those
who glorify Thee with faith!
Anointed with deifying oil by the Father through the Spirit, the Son became a
man and taught him that the singular Godhead exists in three Hypostases.
Glory ..., Unable to gaze upon the beauty of Thine unapproachable glory, О
three-Sunned Unity, the seraphim cover themselves with their wings and
unceasingly glorify Thee with thrice-holy hymns.
Now & ever ..., Thou didst ineffably give birth to the Creator of all, Who
delivereth us from the ancient curse and the corruption of death. Through thee, О
most pure one, have we come to know God in three Hypostases.
ODE III
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more
holy than Thee, O Lover of mankind.
In that of old, О Christ, Thou didst send the Comforter, the power from on
high, from the Father unto Thy holy apostles, Thou didst reveal the one threesunned Essence.
When Thou didst appear to the Patriarch Abraham in human guise, О triune
Unity, Thou didst show forth the immutability of Thy goodness and dominion.
Glory ..., О only God, Who art believed in as in three Hypostases, Who art
manifestly uncircumscribable and incomprehensible to all: deliver our souls from
every tribulation.
Now & ever ..., Guided by the most wise precepts of thy Son, we glorify the
only thrice-radiant Godhead and bless thee, the Ever-virgin.
Sessional hymn, in Tone IV:
Spec. Mel: “Go thou quickly before ...”:
О three-Sunned, uncreated and consubstantial Unity, unapproachable and in
three Hypostases: Take pity on Thy servants, and as Thou art our merciful God,
save us from misfortunes; for Thee, О Lord, do we have as our only Redeemer
and Master, and we cry aloud: Be Thou merciful unto us!
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Beset by many evil circumstances and the assaults of the wicked, and ever
falling into despair, О Virgin Theotokos, we have thee alone as our salvation,
hope and bulwark; and we now entreat thee as is meet with faith: Save thy
servants!
ODE IV
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ.
With the seraphim we glorify Thee, the transcendent Trinity, the dominion in
the unity of the Godhead, for Thou art the inseparable Essence, unapproachable,
though equal in glory, О unattainable God.
As Thou art ineffably separate persons of the Godhead, united in might and a
single dominion, and alone infinite and uncircumscribable, we hymn Thee, the
Creator of all creation.
Glory ..., The beginningless Mind ineffably begat the Word and sent forth the
divine Spirit, Who is equal in might; wherefore, we proclaim the consubstantial
Trinity to be God, the Master of all.
Now & ever ..., Seen by the ancients in images, the Word announced His
incarnation of thee, and having appeared unto us in the later times, He truly
revealed the one Principle in three Hypostases.
ODE V
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin
who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of
all, * and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who
hymn thee..
Knowing through faith the all-accomplishing Godhead, the one
unapproachable Essence, and the three life-creating Hypostases, we worship them
equally - the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit - the equally eternal Being.
О three-Sunned Light, shine upon me Thy singular Divinity, the uncreated
Essence, of Thine essential light. О light-creating Wellspring, illumine me with
everything that is luminous, that I may contemplate Thine ineffable beauty.
Glory ..., Thou alone art truly the Creator and Sustainer of all that is, the most
wise Pilot, the Bestower of life; wherefore, we cry out to Thee with faith: О threeSunned Master, preserve those who hymn Thee!
Now & ever ..., Upon beholding him who of old had become corrupt, He
Who created us in His image, and revealed the divine form therein, desired to
deify us, and through thee became a man, proclaiming the one, triune Godhead.
ODE VI
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the
belly of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O
Jesus Thou King of hosts.
When Christ was baptized, the Father, speaking, revealed His Sonship, and the
Spirit became visible; wherefore, we glorify the one, triune Godhead.
When Isaiah beheld Thee seated upon an exalted throne, hymned by thriceholy voices, he recognized the Trinitarian Hypostasis of the one Godhead.
Glory ..., Show Thou the hearts of us, Thy servants, to be uplifted, О exalted
King in three Hypostases, that we may clearly behold the effulgence of Thy glory.
Now & ever ..., In that he is the Lover of mankind, the Son of God desired to
become visible through the Virgin in our form, enabling mankind to share in
divine glory.
Sessional hymn, in Tone IV:
Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before ...”:
Pondering the unbegotten Father, the begotten Son and the Holy Spirit Who
proceedeth from the Father, we proclaim the one beginningless kingship and
divinity; and rendering glory, with one mind we cry: О consubstantial Trinity our
God, save us!
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
О most pure one, thou didst give birth in the flesh supra-naturally, within
time, unto the God-man, Who transcendeth time, existing from before the ages.
Wherefore, confessing thee to be truly and rightly the Theotokos, we all earnestly
cry out to thee: Grant unto us everlasting glory!
ODE VII
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, *
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord.
Emulating in an Orthodox manner the celestial essences and the noetic ranks,
all of us mortals glorify the one Godhead in three equally active Hypostases.
(Twice)
Glory ..., The sayings of the holy prophets of old revealed Thee in images to
be the one Creator of all the ages, the ineffable God and Lord in three divine
Hypostases.
Now & ever ..., О Thou Who art in essence the invisible and all-accomplishing
Word, Thou didst reveal Thyself to us as a man through the pure Mother of God,
calling mankind to share in Thy divinity.
ODE VIII
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions jaws * in their den;
* while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the
power of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the
Lord.
О thrice-radiant and singular Light, beginningless Essence, incomprehensible
Beauty: Make Thine abode within my heart, and show forth as a temple of Thy
divinity, splendid and pure, me who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!
Hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! (Twice)
Glory ..., О indivisible Trinity, unconfused Union, deliver me from the divers
passions and the darkness of transgressions, and illumine me with Thy divine rays,
that I may embody Thy glory and hymn Thee, the Lord of glory.
Now & ever ..., As Thou art Mind, Essence, Power and Being, the unbegotten
Father, the Word of like form with Him, and the co-enthroned Spirit О
transcendent and ineffable Trinity and Unity Who doest mighty works, preserve
Thy flock through the supplications of the Theotokos, for Thou art in essence He
Who is the Lover of mankind.
ODE IX
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O
Theotokos, thou pure Ever-Virgin.
I now direct my whole heart and mind, and the inclinations of my whole soul
and body, unto Thee, my Creator and Redeemer; and I cry unto Thee, О thriceradiant sole Dominion: Save me, Thy servant, from all manner of temptations and
tribulations. (Twice)
Glory ..., Elevate our mind and thought unto Thee, the Most High, and
illumine me with Thy most pure radiance, О Father, Word and Comforter, Who
dwellest in light unapproachable, О Sun of glory, Ruler of light, that I may ever
glorify Thee, the one God in three Hypostases.
Now & ever ..., Save those who believe in Thee, О Lord, and who proclaim
the one, eternal, beginningless Essence, the three Hypostases of Thy divine and
identical dominion; and by the supplications of the pure Mother of God, grant us
Thy divine glory.
Then, the hymn of Gregory the Sinaite:
(which is chanted every Sunday after the canon)
It is truly meet to glorify Thee, the Word of God, before Whom the cherubim
tremble and quake, and Whom the hosts of heaven glorify. And with fear we
glorify Christ, the Bestower of life, Who rose from the tomb on the third day.
With divine songs let us all in a godly manner hymn the Father, the Son and
the Spirit divine, the one Might in three Hypostases, the Sovereignty and
Dominion,
Whom all mortals hymn and the hosts of heaven glorify, the essential Unity in
three Hypostases, Who is worshipped with faith by all.
We magnify Thee, the Godhead, the Lord of the cherubim, the incomparable
divine Origin of the seraphim, the indivisible Trinity in Unity.
I worship God: the beginningless Father, the Son Who is equally without
beginning, and the Spirit. With hymns let us honor the one indivisible and unified
Essence, the threefold Unity.
Shine forth Thy dazzling lightning flashes upon me, О my God in three
Hypostases, Creator of all, and show me to be a splendid, luminous and
immutable habitation of Thine unapproachable glory.
With fear let us glorify Christ the Bestower of life, Who ineffably became
incarnate of the Virgin, for the cherubim tremble and quake before Him, and the
angelic armies glorify Him.
The rest of Nocturnes, and the dismissal.
AT MATINS
On “God is The Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, in Tone IV:
Having learned the joyful proclamation of the Resurrection from the angel, *
and having cast off the ancestral condemnation, * the women disciples of the
Lord spake exultantly to the apostles: * 'Death is despoiled and Christ God is
risen, ** granting the world great mercy'. (Twice)
Glory ..., the Troparion from the Menaion, otherwise Glory ..., Now & Ever ...,
The Theotokion, in Tone IV, (or in the Tone of that from the Menaion):
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, *
hath been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate
in an uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, *
and through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from
death.
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma II), the Sessional hymns of the
Resurrection, in Tone IV:
Looking into the entrance of the tomb, the Myrrh-bearing women * were
unable to endure the bright radiance of the Angel, * trembling in awe they said; *
‘How is it that He who hath opened Paradise to the Thief hath been stolen? *
How is it that He who before His passion proclaimed His Arising hath been
raised? ** Truly Christ God hath arisen, granting those in Hades life and
resurrection’.
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted on high; * forget not
Thy paupers to the end.
Mortal men laid in a new tomb the One who through a word established the
ends of earth, * for Thou O Savior, didst willingly endure the Cross, * whereby
Thou didst conquer the adversary, and despoil death, * for which cause all those
in Hades extol Thy life-giving Arising saying * 'Christ, the giver of life, hath arisen
and abideth unto the ages'.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
As he contemplated that which was beyond nature * Joseph was struck with
wonder O Theotokos, at thy conception without seed. * He contemplated the
mysterious dew upon the fleece, * the bush un-burnt by fire, * Aaron's rod which
budded. * Thus thy Betrothed and guardian bore witness and cried unto the
priests saying: * A Virgin beareth a child, ** and after child-birth remaineth yet a
virgin.
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter(Kathisma III), the Sessional
hymns of the Resurrection. In Tone IV:
O Savior, Thou didst rise from Hades as immortal, * raising the world together
with Thee by Thy might O Christ our God. * With strength hast Thou
overthrown the dominion of death, * revealing the Resurrection to all O Merciful
one. ** Wherefore we also glorify Thee, O only Lover of mankind.
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all
Thy wonders.
Gabriel radiant in white vestments descended from the heights above, * and
approaching the rock upon which the Rock of life was lying, * cried unto the
weeping women saying: * 'Cease your cries of lamentation; * for ye have now
obtained merciful compassion. * Take courage, for the One you seek is truly risen.
* Therefore cry unto the Apostles telling them that the Lord hath arisen, * to
worship the risen One; ** and having received gladness, to take courage, together
with Eve.
Glory, Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
All the choirs of Angels were struck with wonder, O Pure Virgin, * at the
awesome mystery of thy conception. * How can the One who doth hold all things
in place with only a nod, * now be held in thy arms as a man? * How can the
Eternal accept a beginning? * How can the One who nourishes everything that
hath breath by His ineffable goodness, * be suckled at thy breast? * And upon
seeing these things, with hymns they glorify thee ** as truly the Mother of God.
If a POLYELEOS is appointed, we chant: (Select verses):
Verse: Praise ye the name of the Lord; O ye servants, praise the Lord.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
Verse: Blessed is the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth in Jerusalem. Alleluia,
alleluia, alleluia.
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy
endureth forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
Verse: O give thanks unto the God of Heaven; for His mercy endureth
forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
(On the Sunday of the Prodigal Son, Meat-Fare, and Cheese-Fare Sundays,
after the Polyeleos we chant Psalm 136: “By the rivers of Babylon…")
Then, the Megalynarion of the feast is chanted, if there is one, with the
selected psalm verse. However, if it is a Sunday, in general parish practice the
Megalynarion is chanted only once, without the psalm verse, unless it is a Great
feast of the Lord, or the Theotokos.
The Resurrectional Verses (THE EVLOGITARIA)
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
The assembly of angels was amazed, * beholding Thee numbered among the
dead; * yet, O Savior, * destroying the stronghold of death, * and with Thyself
raising up Adam, ** Thou hast freed all from Hades.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
Why mingle ye myrrh with tears of pity, * O ye women disciples? * Thus said
the radiant angel within the tomb * addressing the myrrh-bearing women; *
behold the tomb and understand, ** for the Savior hath arisen from the tomb.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
Very early * the myrrh-bearing women hastened * unto Thy tomb, lamenting,
* but the angel stood before them and said: * the time for lamentation is passed,
weep not, ** but tell the apostles of the Resurrection.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
The myrrh-bearing women, * with myrrh came to Thy tomb, O Savior,
bewailing, * but the angel addressed them, saying: * Why number ye the living
among the dead, * for as God ** He is risen from the tomb.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
Let us worship the Father, * and His Son, and the Holy Spirit, * the Holy
Trinity, * one in essence, * crying with the Seraphim: ** Holy, Holy, Holy art
Thou, O Lord.
Both Now & ever ..., and unto the ages of ages, Amen..
In bringing forth the Giver of life, * thou hast delivered Adam from sin, O
Virgin, * and hast brought joy to Eve * instead of sorrow; * and those fallen from
life * have thereunto been restored, ** by Him Who of thee was incarnate, God
and man.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice).
Then the small Litany and:
The Sessional Hymn:
The Myrrh-bearing women hastened to proclaim to the Apostles * the news of
Thy wondrous Rising, O Christ: * that as God Thou hast arisen, ** granting the
world great mercy.
The Songs of Ascent: in Tone IV, 1st Antiphon:
From my youth * do many passions war against me; * but do Thou Thyself
defend ** and save me, O my Savior.
Ye haters of Zion * shall be shamed by the Lord; * for like grass, by the fire **
shall ye be withered.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ...,
In the Holy Spirit, * every soul is quickened, * and, through cleansing, is
exalted ** and made radiant by the Triple Unity in a hidden sacred manner.
2nd Antiphon:
From the depths of my soul * I have cried unto Thee fervently, O Lord; ** let
Thy divine ears be attentive unto me.
Every one who hath set their hope in the Lord, * is higher than all those who
mourn.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ...,
By the Holy Spirit the streams of grace swell up; * watering all creation
engendering life.
3rd Antiphon:
Let my heart be raised to Thee, O Lord; * and let none of the pleasures of the
world lure me unto weakness.
As one that hath tender love for one's mother; * so should we have even more
fervent love for the Lord.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ...,
By the Holy Spirit cometh an abundance of divine knowledge, contemplation
and wisdom; for by Him the Word unveils all the Father's teachings.
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Arise, O Lord, help us * and redeem us, for Thy
name's sake.
The Verse: O God, with our ears have we heard, for our fathers have told
us: the work which Thou hast wrought in their days, in the days of old.
Let every breath ...,
The Sunday Resurrection Gospel. Then:
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord
Jesus, * the only sinless One. * We venerate Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy holy
Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we know none
other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye faithful, * let us
worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the Cross joy hath
come to all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His Resurrection; *
for, having endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by death.
Psalm 50, Then:
Glory ..., in Tone VI:
Through the prayers of the Apostles * O Merciful One, ** blot out the
multitude of our transgressions.
Now & Ever ..., in Tone VI:
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the
multitude of our transgressions.
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according
to the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions.
Jesus having risen from the grave, * as He foretold, * hath given us life eternal,
** and great mercy.
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...”, Then the Canons:
Tone IV: A composition of St. John of Damascus.
ODE I
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old,
* and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the
power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
O Master, Thou wast lifted upon the immaculate tree of the Cross, setting
aright our fall and healing the total ruin wrought through a tree, as Thou art
supremely good and All-powerful.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
In the tomb bodily, in Hades with Thine own soul as God, in Paradise with
the Thief, and on the throne with the Father and the Spirit, filling all things, O
Christ, yet remaining uncircumscribed.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Without seed, by the Father's will, thou hast conceived from the
divine Spirit the Son of God, giving birth in the flesh to the One who for our sake
came forth from His Father without mother and from thee without father.
Another Canon, of Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
O Lord by Thy precious Blood, Thou hast healed the ruined race of mankind,
demolishing the dominion of the mighty one, who of old spoiled the creature that
Thou didst fashion.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Through dying Thou hast become the resurrection of the dead; for the power
of death was done away with when it wrestled with Life-eternal, God incarnate
and the Master of all things.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Surpassingly fairer than the heavenly Powers was Thy divine
living Temple, the Virgin, Thy holy Mountain, who carried Thee, our God, in her
womb.
Another Canon, to the most holy Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O Pure Virgin, from fear of thine Offspring peoples trembled, nations were
troubled, mighty kingdoms faltered; for my King hath come and put down the
tyrant, redeeming the world from corruption.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Living on high, but condescending to become a man, Thou O Christ hath
sanctified Thine abode, showing it to be steadfast; for she who hath given birth to
Thee the Creator, hath alone, after childbirth, remained a treasury of virginity.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE III
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O
Lord, art my strength, * my refuge and foundation.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
The Tree of life, the true noetic Vine, is seen hanging upon the Cross, pouring
forth unto all incorruption.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
As One great, as One to be feared, as One who hath subdued the rage of
Hades, and as God incorruptible, Thou hast arisen in the flesh.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou hast become the sole intermediary of supranatural blessings for those on earth, wherefore we bring unto thee our salutation.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
The serpent plunged its poison filled fangs into me; O Savior, but with the
nails in Thy hands, O Master, Thou hast crushed them; for there is none among
mankind Holier than Thee, O Lover of mankind.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Thou wast revealed, O Lover of mankind, as voluntarily dead in a tomb,
reopening the gates of Hades for the souls found therein from every age, O Lifegiver; for there is none among the Holy Holier than Thee, O Lover of mankind.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Thou hast appeared as an un-ploughed field, bringing forth the
fruit of life, the cause of immortality for all who partake of it, the Holy One of the
Holy, Who reposeth in Holiness.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Human nature became purified when through thee it encountered the
unendurable divine fire; like a mysterious loaf baked within thee, most pure
Virgin, by the fire that preserved thee unharmed.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Who is this who is so truly near to God, that she doth excel all the ranks of
Angels? She who alone in the comeliness of virginity doth shine forth as the
Mother of the Almighty One.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
The small litany:
ODE IV
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the
Cross, * the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud:
* Glory be to Thy power, O Lord!
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
To heal my passions, Thou didst willingly ascend the Cross and endure the
Passion of Thine undefiled flesh; wherefore we cry unto Thee: 'Glory to Thy
power, O Lord.'
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
When death had tasted of Thy sinless and life-giving body, O Master, it was
rightly slain; and we cry out to Thee: 'Glory to Thy power, O Lord.'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Without knowing wedlock thou didst bear a child, O Virgin, and
after childbirth thou didst remain yet a virgin; wherefore with never silent voices,
O Sovereign Lady, we cry unto thee with unwavering faith, ‘Rejoice!’
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Israel, which was subject to the law, did not recognize in Thee, O Christ, God
Who had ordained the law; but transgressing the law by nailing Thee to the Cross
as a lawless One, they proved themselves unworthy of the law-giving.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Thy deified soul, O Savior, captured the treasuries of Hades raising together
with itself the souls kept therein from every age; while Thy life-giving body flowed
forth incorruption unto all.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: As the ever Virgin and true Theotokos we all glorify thee, O Most
pure one, for Moses, the God-Seer, saw thee prefigured in the bush consumed
with fire, yet remaining un-burnt.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Living among mankind, the invisible One, who is the incomprehensible
Godhead, became visible, taking a wondrous form from thee, O Maiden, and
saving those who acknowledge thee to be the pure Mother of God.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The Virgin hath received the immaterial One in corporeal form, becoming an
infant from her by His participation in corporeal things; and is thus known in two
natures, God bearing flesh and a supra-natural man.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The Word and God, Who dwelt in thee, O Virgin, and was incarnate without
seed, preserved thee a Virgin during thy childbirth, and kept thee a Virgin after
childbirth, for He alone is the Sovereign Lord and Fashioner of all creation.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE V
Irmos: Thou hast come, O my Lord, * as a light into the world, * a holy
light turning from the gloom of ignorance * those who hymn Thee
with faith.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
O Lord, in Thy compassion Thou didst descend to earth; and raise up fallen
human nature when Thou wast hung upon the Tree.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
By Thy divine Resurrection Thou hast abolished the pangs of death, O Christ,
and taken away the accusation of my sins, O most Compassionate One
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: We have gained thee as our anchor and the hope of our salvation,
O Bride of God, for thee we set forth as an unconquerable weapon against our
foes.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Mindlessly, Hades swallowed Thee whole in its mouth, for beholding Thee
nailed to a Tree, and pierced by a lance, it reckoned Thee, the living God, to be a
mere breathless man; but when put to the test it learned the strength of Thy
divinity.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
When the temple of Thy body was destroyed, O Lover of mankind, both the
tomb which took possession of it, and Hades, unwillingly paid the price; the latter
by giving up the souls of the Saints, and the former their bodies, O Immortal
One.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Behold!, that which was foretold by the Prophet hath now come
to pass; for the Virgin who knew not wedlock, hath carried in her womb the God
of all, and given birth to the eternal Son, who granteth peace to all who hymn her
praises.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Having made His abode within thee, O Pure Virgin, the Son of God rendered
thee a house of glory, a holy Mountain of God, a bride, a bridal chamber, and a
temple of sanctification, O Paradise of everlasting delight.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
From virginal blood, O Christ, hast Thou seedlessly taken most pure
Hypostatic flesh, endowed with reason and intelligence, and with a self-governing
soul, energy, and will.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
A virginal womb hath put the tyrant’s understanding to shame; for with His
hand the infant hath probed the soul-destroying lair of asps, overthrowing the
boastful traitor, and making him subservient to the faithful.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE VI
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * 'I will sacrifice unto
Thee with a voice of praise' * having been cleansed of the blood of the
demons' * by the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Thou hast ascended the Cross and, girded with power, wrestled with the
tyrant, and as God hurled him down from on high; raising up Adam by Thine
invincible might.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Thou didst arise from the tomb, O Christ, in radiant comeliness, scattering all
the enemies by Thy divine might, and as God filling all things with joy.
Theotokion; Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O new wonder, more wondrous than all wonders; for a Virgin, without
knowing a man, hath conceived in her womb the One who upholdeth all things,
in nowise constraining Him.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
I have foolishly puffed up my soul and Hades, opening wide its throat, hath
swallowed me whole, but Christ hath come down and raised up my life, for He is
the Lover of mankind.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Death hath perished through death; for He that died hath arisen granting me
incorruption; and appearing unto the women, the immortal One hath proclaimed
joy.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Thy pure womb, O Theotokos, hath proven itself to be a palace
of the unapproachable Godhead; upon Whom the Heavenly Hosts fear to gaze.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The serpent of old deceived me, and put me to death through my foremother
Eve; but now, O pure One, through thee He who fashioned me hath called me
back from corruption.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The depths of compassion declared thee, O Maiden, to be the ineffably
chosen deep of wonders; for from thee Christ the Pearl hath shone forth with the
lightning flash of His divinity.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
The small litany:
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone IV:
My Savior and Redeemer * from the grave, as God, * hath raised those born
on earth from their chains, * and shattered the gates of Hades; ** and as Lord
arisen on the third day.
Ikos: Let all of us, born of earth, hymn Christ the giver of life, who arose from
the dead on the third day. For today, by His power He hath smashed the gates of
death, slaughtering Hades and crushing the sting of death, setting Adam free with
Eve. Therefore with thanksgiving we cry out aloud our fervent praises, for He
alone, as almighty God and Master, hath risen on the third day.
ODE VII
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, *
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Washed in the divine Blood of Christ, mankind hath been called back to
incorruption, singing with thanksgiving: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy
glory, O Lord.'
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Thy tomb, O Christ, hath been revealed, as the life bearing source of our
resurrection, more lovely than Paradise, and more resplendent than any royal
bridal chamber.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Rejoice! sanctified and divine dwelling of the Most High, for
through thee, O Theotokos, joy hath been granted to those who cry: 'Blessed art
thou among women, O all-immaculate Lady.'
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Hanging upon a Tree Thou hast humbled the eye of the haughty and cast
down the arrogant brow, saving mankind, O supremely exalted Lord and God of
our fathers, blessed art Thou.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
By Thy power exalt the horn of us who serve Thee, O Master, who hath arisen
from the dead and emptied Hades of its former wealth, the multitudes of peoples.
O supremely exalted Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.
Refrain: We bless the Lord; Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Trinitarian: Following the divine teachings we glorify the one Godhead, as a
flame of three lights, without commingling and undivided, eternally enlightening
the whole of creation which doth sing: 'O supremely exalted Lord and God of our
fathers, blessed art Thou.'
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The fire of love for the Virgin burning within my heart draweth me to hymn,
and cry unto the Mother and Virgin: 'O Blessed one, the Lord of Powers is with
thee.'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Thou wast revealed as higher than all creation, for thou hast given birth to the
Creator and Lord of all; wherefore I cry unto thee O Theotokos: 'O Blessed one,
the Lord of Powers is with thee.'
Refrain: We bless the Lord; Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Trinitarian: Honoring Thee as one indivisible Lordship, in three sacred
wellsprings, I hymn One Nature in three Hypostases, crying: 'Blessed art Thou,
Who hath brought order to all that is.'
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE VIII
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions jaws * in their den;
* while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the
power of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the
Lord.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Spreading Thine arms upon the Cross, O Master, Thou hast gathered into one
all the nations, and revealed one Church which hymneth Thee, for both those on
earth and those in heaven sing with one accord: 'Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of
the Lord, and supremely exalt Him unto the ages'
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
An Angel white as snow, blazing with the unapproachable light of the
Resurrection, appeared to the women crying out: 'Why seek ye the living as a man
in the tomb: Christ hath truly risen.' To him let us also cry: 'Sing unto the Lord, all
ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Thou alone in all generations, O most pure Virgin, wast revealed
as the Theotokos; for Thou didst become the abode of the Godhead, O allimmaculate one, and remained un-burnt by the fire of the unapproachable light;
wherefore we all bless thee, O Mary, Bride of God.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Upon seeing Thine unjust sacrifice, creation became darkened and grieved; for
while the earth trembled, the sun clothed itself in darkness; but we without
ceasing praise and supremely exalt Thee, O Christ, unto the ages.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Having come down to me, even into Hades, Thou didst open a pathway for
mankind through the resurrection, and ascending on high, bearing me upon Thy
shoulders, Thou hast brought me unto the Father; wherefore I cry unto Thee:
'Praise the Lord all ye His works, and supremely exalt him throughout all ages.'
Refrain: We bless the Lord; Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Trinitarian: We glorify the first Mind and cause of all, the Father Who alone is
without cause, the beginningless Word, and the Comforting Spirit, one God and
Lord, Creator of all, as we worship the Trinity one in essence and supremely exalt
Him throughout all ages.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Having fashioned thee from Adam’s side, the Lord of all, became incarnate
from thy virginity, hymning Him we cry out: 'All ye His works, bless ye the Lord,
and exalt Him above all unto the ages.'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
In his tent Abraham beheld the mystery which came to pass in thee, O
Theotokos, for he mystically received thy Son, while not yet in the flesh, and
sang:: 'Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him above all unto
the ages'.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The prefiguring of thy virginity saved the holy youths equal in number to the
Trinity; for in virginal bodies they trampled down the flame, O Maiden, as they
cried aloud: 'Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him above all
unto the ages'.
After the Troparia from the Menaion for ODE VIII, we chant:
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely
exalting Him throughout all ages.
And then the appointed Katavasia:
After which we chant the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (the Magnificat)
Note: on great feasts special Megalynarion are chanted in place of the Magnificat:
Verse: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in
God my Savior.
And after each Verse:
Refrain: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more
glorious than the Seraphim; * who without corruption gavest birth to God the
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; * for
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: For the Mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His
name; * and His mercy is on them that fear Him * unto generation and
generation.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: He hath showed strength with His arm, * and He hath scattered the
proud in the imagination of their heart.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: He hath put down the mighty from their seat, * and exalted them of
low degree; * He hath filled the hungry with good things, * and the rich He
hath sent empty away.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: He hath holpen His servant Israel * in remembrance of His mercy,
* as He spake to our fathers, * to Abraham and his seed forever.
Refrain: More honorable …
ODE IX
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
O my God, through Thy passion which Thou didst endure in the flesh upon
the Cross, the fullness of Thy nature assumed the fullness of my nature in a union
without commingling, granting unto me, in Thy loving compassion, the fullness of
salvation.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
When Thy Disciples saw Thine opened tomb and the grave clothes, that had
once held God, lying emptied by Thy Resurrection, they rejoiced with the Angel
saying: 'The Lord hath indeed arisen.'
Refrain: We bless the Lord; Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Trinitarian: All we the faithful worship a Unity of divine essence, but a Trinity
of Hypostases without commingling, whom we magnify as equal in power and
equal in honor.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
In Eden, the serpent crept up on me through guile and took me prisoner; but
the almighty Lord hath dashed him against the mighty rock of Golgotha, like an
infant, and through the Tree of the Cross opened up for me once again entrance
to spiritual delight.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Thou hast laid waste to the fortified strongholds of the enemy and plundered
his wealth by Thine own all-powerful hand, raising me with Thee from the ruins
of Hades, exposing the ancient boaster to be impotent and an object of derision.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Come Thou, Who lovest mankind, and visit the torments of Thy humbled
people; and with Thine own compassionate and mighty arm fortify the power of
Thy Cross-bearing peoples against the blaspheming enemies and rescue Thine
inheritance, O Christ.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
We behold thee, O all-immaculate Virgin, as a lily dyed with the purple of the
divine Spirit, shining forth in the midst of thorns and filling with sweet fragrance
those who in truth magnify thee.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
From thy womb, O all-immaculate One, the Incorruptible One hath assumed
our corrupt nature and by His compassion revealed it within himself to be
incorrupt; wherefore as the true Theotokos, we magnify thee.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
As the Sovereign Lady of all created things, grant thou unto thy people
trophies of victory, subduing the adversary to the Church, so that, as the
Theotokos, we may magnify thee.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
The small litany:
Then, “Holy is our God ...”: (Thrice)
Exapostilarion (Svetilen).
Note: The Exapostilarion is taken from the prescribed Eothinon according to
the Resurrection Gospel, however, If the Menaion service is ‘feasted’ the
Exapostilarion, with the appointed Theotokion, are taken from the Menaion.
On the Aposticha: “Let every breath ...”, 8 Stichera of the Resurrection,
however, if the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ sing the first 4 Stichera from
the Resurrection, and the last 4 from the Menaion, with the appointed verses.
On the Aposticha, the Resurrection Stichera, in Tone IV:
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written * This glory shall be
to all His saints.
O all-powerful Lord, * Who didst endure the Cross and death, * and arose
from the dead, ** we glorify Thy Holy Resurrection.
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His
power.
By Thy Cross, O Christ, Thou hast delivered us from the ancient curse, * and
by Thy death Thou hast conquered the devil who tyrannized our nature. * By
Thine arising Thou hast filled all things with joy, * wherefore we cry unto Thee: **
'O Lord risen from the dead, glory be to Thee!'
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the
multitude of His greatness.
O Christ the Savior, * with Thy Cross, guide us to Thy truth, * and deliver us
from the snares of the enemy; * O Thou who art risen from the dead * raise us
also who have fallen through sin, * by the stretching out of Thy hand, * O Lord,
at the behest of the prayers of Thy Saints.
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the
psaltery and harp.
Without departing from Thy Father's bosom, * in Thy tender compassion,
Thou didst descend to earth, * O Only-begotten Word of God, * without change
becoming man. * Whilst Thou art impassible in Thy divinity, * Thou didst suffer
the Cross and death in the flesh; * and rising from the dead Thou hast granted
immortality to the race of mankind, ** as Thou alone art all-powerful.
Other Stichera, by Anatolius:
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and
flute.
Thou didst endure death in the flesh * thereby ensuring us of immortality, *
and thou didst abide within a tomb, * thereby freeing us from Hades, * and raising
us up with together with Thyself, * suffering as a man, but rising as God, *
wherefore we cry unto Thee the Lover of mankind: ** 'O Lord giver of life glory
be to Thee.'
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.
The rocks were rent asunder, O Savior, * when Thy Cross was set upon
Golgotha; * the gate-keepers of Hades were smitten with terror, * when Thou
wast laid in the sepulcher as One dead; * for abolishing the stronghold of death, *
Thou hast granted incorruption to all the dead by Thy Resurrection, * O Lord and
Savior, ** giver of life, glory be to Thee!
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted high; * forget not
Thy paupers to the end.
The women longed to see Thy Resurrection, O Christ God; * Mary Magdalene
having come in anticipation * found the stone rolled away from the tomb, * with
an Angel seated upon it, saying: * 'Why seek ye the living among the dead? ** He
hath arisen as God, that He may save all things.'
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all
Thy wonders.
Tell us, O ye Jews, * where is Jesus, whom ye have thought to guard? * Where
is He whom you placed in the grave, * sealing it with the stone? * Give back the
dead, ye who denied life; * give back the buried One or else believe in the Risen
One. * Though you keep silent about the Lord's Rising, * the stones cry out aloud,
* above all the one that was rolled away from the tomb. * Great is Thy mercy! *
Great the mystery of Thy dispensation! * Our Savior, glory be to Thee!
Glory ..., The Eothinon of the Resurrection Gospel 
Note: If the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ the Eothinon is taken from
the Menaion, and the Eothinon of the Gospel is read at the end of Matins.
Now & Ever ..., Theotokion. In Tone II.
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took
flesh from thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, Eve
set free, * death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in praise
we cry: ** Blessed art thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-pleased,
glory be to thee.
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion:
Having risen from the tomb, and having burst the bonds of Hades, * Thou
hast destroyed the sentence of death, O Lord, * delivering all from the snares of
the enemy. * Manifesting Thyself to Thine apostles, Thou didst send them forth
to preach; * and through them hast granted Thy peace to the world, * O Thou
Who alone art plenteous in mercy.
AT LITURGY
Typica and Beatitudes
Through a tree Adam became an exile from Paradise; but through the tree of
the Cross the Thief made his home in Paradise, for the former through tasting set
aside his Creator's commandment, while the latter, crucified with him, confessed
the hidden God, as he cried, ‘Remember me in Thy kingdom’.
Thou wast lifted upon the Cross, O Lord, and Thou hast abolished the power
of death, and as God Thou hast expunged the record held against us. O only
Lover of mankind, grant the Thief’s repentance to us also, who serve Thee with
faith, O Christ our God, and cry unto Thee, ‘Remember us also in Thy kingdom’.
On the Cross Thou didst tear up our record with the lance, and numbered
among the dead Thou didst bind the tyrant there, thus delivering all from the
bonds of Hades by Thy Resurrection; through which, O Lord who lovest
mankind, we have been enlightened and we cry unto Thee, ‘Remember us also in
Thy kingdom’.
Thou wast crucified and arose from the tomb on the third day as conqueror,
and Thou hast raised Adam the first-formed again, O only Immortal, grant me
also, O Lord, to turn again to repentance from my whole heart, and ever cry unto
Thee with fervent faith, ‘Remember me, O Savior, in Thy kingdom’.
For our sakes the impassible became a man, subject to suffering, and willingly
nailed on the Cross He hath raised us with himself; therefore with the Cross we
also glorify the Passion and Resurrection, through which we have been
refashioned, and through which we are saved, as we cry, ‘Remember us also in
Thy kingdom’.
Let us the faithful implore him who rose from the dead, despoiled the might
of Hades, and appeared to the women as He cried 'Rejoice!'; free our souls from
corruption, as we ever cry unto him in the words of the good Thief, ‘Remember
us also in Thy kingdom’.
Let us the faithful with one mind vow to glorify the Father and the Son and
the Most holy Spirit, Unity of Godhead in three Hypostases, remaining
unconfused, simple, undivided and unapproachable, through which we are
delivered from the fire of eternal punishment.
Theotokion: O Christ, most merciful Master, we bring to Thee Thy Mother,
who bore Thee in the flesh without seed and truly remained a Virgin incorrupt
after child-birth, to intercede: ever grant pardon offences to those who cry unto
Thee: Remember us also in Thy kingdom.
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone IV:
Having learned the joyful proclamation of the Resurrection from the angel, *
and having cast off the ancestral condemnation, * the women disciples of the
Lord spake exultantly to the apostles: * 'Death is despoiled and Christ God is
risen, ** granting the world great mercy'.
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone IV:
My Savior and Redeemer * from the grave, as God, * hath raised those born
on earth from their chains, * and shattered the gates of Hades; ** and as Lord
arisen on the third day.
The Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: How magnified are Thy works O Lord, *
In wisdom hast Thou made them all.
The Verse: Bless the Lord O my soul, O Lord my God Thou hast been
magnified exceedingly.
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Bend Thy bow and proceed prosperously, and be
King, because of truth and meekness and righteousness.
The Verse: Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity.