SUNDAY EVENING: TONE IV
AT VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 3 Stichera of repentance, in Tone IV:
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness,
I have sinned against Thee, О Lover of mankind, and not according to my
human nature, for which I might ask forgiveness, but inhumanly, past my nature,
beyond forgiveness. О my Savior Who didst become a man, transcending the laws
of nature and comprehension by the human mind, since Thou hast a love for
mankind surpassing understanding, have mercy on me that I may turn back to
Thee.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
Thou didst appoint repentance for those who sin, and not for the righteous, О
Christ. I have as examples the thief and the prodigal, Manasseh and the harlot, the
persecutor Paul, the publican and Peter who fell away, yet I am brought sorely to
despair. Knowing Thy supremely good love for mankind, О Savior, I turn to Thee
and weep, filled with the good hope that Thou wilt accept me.
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
Unto me who am now sunk in the passions of the body and am far removed
from Thee, О King and God of all, grant compunction, the removal of evils and
perfect amendment. In Thy great goodness, О omnipotent Jesus, Savior of our
souls, save me, a prodigal, who otherwise have no hope.
Then the Stichera of the saint, from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these
Stichera of the holy, incorporeal angels, in the same tone:
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
Thou didst establish the angelic armies as pleasing habitations and most
honored receptacles of divine light, О Immortal One; setting them in godly ranks
as beholders and ministers of Thy glory, to carry out Thy word and fulfill Thine
all-accomplishing and most holy will.
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
Desiring as God to reveal an abyss of goodness, О Thou Who art without
beginning, Thou didst first create the angelic choirs and the ranks of the hosts by
Thine almighty hand and divine command; for it was truly fitting that goodness be
poured out and go forth, that it might be given unto many, О Master.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
The six-winged seraphim, the many-eyed cherubim and the exceedingly
exalted thrones, the dominions, the principalities, authorities, archangels, angels
and divine powers surround Thee, partaking directly of Thine all-accomplishing
radiance, praising Thy glory, О Almighty; praying to Thee on our behalf.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
O all-immaculate one, who hast surpassed the ranks of angels: With the angels
ever beseech Him Who hath dominion over the angels and all of creation, that He
grant us remission of sins, deliverance from the passions, and make us, who hymn
His glory, worthy inheritors of incorrupt sustenance.
Then, “О Joyous Light ...”, the Prokeimenon in Tone VIII:
Prokeimenon: Behold now, bless ye the Lord, * all ye servants of the Lord.
Verse: Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of
our God.
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of repentance, in Tone IV:
I desired to erase the record of my transgressions with tears, and to please
Thee well by repentance for the rest of my life; but the enemy deceiveth me and
wageth war on my soul. Before I utterly perish, О Lord, save me!
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress,
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us.
Who is tempest-tossed, yet fleeth to Thy haven, О Lord, and is not saved?
Who is sick and, falling down before Thy healing power, is not cured? О Lord,
Creator of all and Physician of the infirm: Before I utterly perish, save me!
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.
To the Martyrs: О Christ God, Who art glorified in the memorials of Thy
saints, be Thou entreated by them, and send down upon us great mercy.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Rejoice, O cloud of Light! * Rejoice, radiant candlestick! * Rejoice, jar wherein
the Manna was kept! * Rejoice, staff of Aaron! * Rejoice, bush un-burnt! * Rejoice,
bridal-chamber! * Rejoice, thou throne! * Rejoice, holy mountain! * Rejoice,
refuge! Rejoice, divine table! * Rejoice, mystic portal! ** Rejoice, thou joy of all!
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion through Our
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal.
SUNDAY NIGHT: TONE IV
AT COMPLINE
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos
ODE I
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old,
* and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the
power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.
Accept the supplication of my soul, О most pure Lady who hast given birth to
God in the flesh; for I have fled unto thy mighty assistance, lest my hope utterly
fail.
Like a slave I fall down before thee, О most pure Birthgiver of God, for, as
thou hast great boldness, by thy supplications mediating before thy Son, deliver
me from all tribulations.
Glory ..., Engulfed by the waves of the sea of life and beset by cruel
temptations, I have hastened to the calm haven of thy protection; wherefore,
deliver me from evils, О Theotokos.
Now & ever ..., With thy compassionate and calm gaze look upon thy servant
and make haste to hearken unto me, О good one, fulfilling the supplication of thy
servant and destroying the counsels of the evil, О most pure one.
ODE III
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O
Lord, art my strength, * my refuge and foundation.
О Lady, thou art an aide for the faithful against the enemy, an ally in battles,
and a refuge for those who grieve.
In that He is thy Son, pray to the God of all, to Whom thou hast given birth in
the flesh, that throughout all circumstances of life He grant me remission of mine
evils.
Glory ..., Mercifully regard our lowliness, О Lady, that thy servants may be
delivered from the wrath which ever besets us.
Now & ever ..., Ever saved from all sorrows by thy protections, О good Lady,
we offer praise to thy Son.
ODE IV
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord * and I am afraid. * Having
understood Thy works, * I am in awe of Thee O Lord.
As thou hast boldness before thy Son, О pure Birthgiver of God, free me
from this present temptation, setting at naught the constant machinations of the
enemy who ever wages war upon me.
О ye choirs of the ranks on high, ye martyrs and apostles, ye assembly of the
divine prophets, ye righteous and venerable: with the Mother and Theotokos pray
to Christ on our behalf.
Glory ..., О Christ, accept Thy most glorious Mother who prayeth for the
world and mercifully crieth out to Thee: “O my Son, accept my supplication and
calm the wrath which hangeth over the world!”
Now & ever ..., I fall down before thee, О Theotokos, and pray from the
depths of my heart: Rescue me from these present trials, that, delivered from evils,
I may offer hymnody to thy splendor.
ODE V
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise
early to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of
Thy Father's divinity, * O Lover of mankind.
О pure one, thou hope and help of mortals, take pity on our lowliness, we
pray, and free us from this present wrath.
Availing ourselves of thy prayer as it were an insuperable rampart, О pure one,
we cry out to thee: О Lady, drive away the invisible foe!
Glory ..., Let us who put our trust in thee never be put to shame, О most pure
one, we pray with tears, rendering homage to thy goodness.
Now & ever ..., With thy most pure hand drive away the enemy who warreth
against us, О all-hymned one; and let the accursed ones understand that we have
placed our hope in thee.
ODE VI
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the
belly of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O
Jesus Thou King of hosts.
Wash away our sins, we pray, О Lover of mankind, by the supplications of her
who gave birth to Thee without seed; for, for our sake О Word, Thou didst shed
Thy precious blood.
Against us hath a wicked assembly of those who unjustly war against us
gathered together, O Bride of God; but cast them down, like Peter cast down
Simon Magus of old.
Glory ..., Hearken unto our prayer, О Lady, we pray, and still thou the waves
of the tempest of divers pangs whereby enemies have assembled against us.
Now & ever ..., Transform my grief into joy, in that Thou art compassionate,
replace my lamentation with gladness, and have pity, О Christ Who, for the sake
of the Theotokos, transformed water into wine in Cana of Galilee.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone IV:
Darkened in mind by many transgressions, I, the prodigal, cry out to thy
mighty aid, O Theotokos: Enlighten the eyes of my soul, shine upon me a radiant
beam of repentance, and clothe me in the armor of light, O pure Virgin Birthgiver
of God.
ODE VII
Irmos: Forsake us not to the end for Thy names sake, * for we have not
forsaken Thy commandments, * and take not Thy mercy from us * O Lord
God of our Fathers, * who art supremely hymned throughout the ages.
Amid divers perils and tribulations, I have now fled to thee, my salvation, О
pure one, and I cry aloud: Let me not be turned away, ashamed, from my hope,
but hearken, and deliver me from the snares of those who pursue me.
Like a slave I bend my neck, wretch that I am, and I utter a cry from the
depths of my heart; stretching forth my hands, I bend my knees and entreat thee,
the most pure Virgin, that I be delivered from the tribulations of those who ever
assail me with the assaults of the evil one.
Glory ..., О most glorious and pure Mary, boast of mortals, we pray: Grant
thine aid unto us who pray and piously worship thine Offspring, for we have
acquired none other hope or helper than thee.
Now & ever ..., О Mary who knewest not a man, О helper of the faithful, who
hast given birth to God in a manner transcending understanding and all nature,
from sudden temptations deliver as pure those who honor thee, unharmed by all
enemies, visible and invisible.
ODE VIII
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions jaws * in their den;
* while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the
power of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the
Lord.
I dare not raise my hands unto thy Son, О pure one, for I am wholly defiled;
wherefore, in boldness I flee to thee, О Lady. Mediate with the compassionate
God Who is easily placated, that we may be delivered from the adverse foes who
afflict us.
To thee have I entrusted mine eyes, heart and soul, О most pure one;
wherefore, have pity, О pure Lady, falling down before the Compassionate One,
on behalf of me who am wicked and unable to endure, that He save me from all
want, wounds and grief.
Glory ..., “With Thy weaponry fell those who war against us, О Lord, in that
Thou art mighty, and grant victory unto those who trust in Thee with faith, О
Master!” prayeth the Theotokos with John the forerunner, the choir of the
apostles and Thy martyrs.
Now & ever ..., Once Gabriel brought thee the joy of the annunciation, О
pure virgin, and by thy birthgiving hath loosed the grief of our first mother;
wherefore, having cleansed my soul of despondency, by thy prayers render me unashamed.
ODE IX.
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos.
Quickly manifest thine aid, О Virgin Theotokos; and eagerly bend thine ear
and hearkening to us who fervently cry aloud, free us from evils, and deliver us by
thy prayers.
Wholly stuck fast in slothfulness, I find myself in an abyss of despair due to
my transgressions; wherefore, stretch forth thy hand unto me, О Virgin Mother,
as Christ did to Peter, and deliver me from the depths of sin.
Glory,..: Lay low the tongue of the ungovernable and haughty one which, like
a sharpened arrow, aims to slay me, О Virgin; melt it like wax, and show forth his
counsels to be in vain.
Now & ever ..., Destroy all the counsels of those who have armed themselves
against us, О Mother of God Most High, and fill with joy those who trust in thee,
that we may all earnestly proclaim thine aid.
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...”, and a prostration. Trisagion through Our
Father..., Troparion. The rest as usual. Dismissal.
ON MONDAY MORNING: TONE IV
AT MATINS
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,
the Sessional hymns of repentance, in Tone IV:
О Lord, visit Thou my lowly soul, which hath squandered all its whole life in
sins; accept me as Thou didst the harlot, and save me.
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy
wrath.
Navigating the deep of this present life, I consider the abyss of my many evils;
and lacking a helmsman for my thoughts, I utter unto Thee the cry of Peter: Save
me, О Christ! Save me, О God, in that Thou art the Lover of mankind!
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Thou art the invincible rampart of us Christians, * O Virgin Theotokos; * for,
fleeing to thee, we remain unharmed. * And though we sin again, we have thee as
our advocate. * Wherefore, in thanksgiving we cry aloud to thee: * Rejoice, O
thou who art full of grace! ** The Lord is with thee!
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone IV:
We shall soon enter together into the bridal-chamber of Christ, that we may all
hear the divine voice of Christ our God. Come, ye who love the glory of heaven,
and having lit our lamps with faith, with the wise virgins let us receive it.
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy
wrath.
Condemned by the multitude of my transgressions, I am troubled by fear of
torment, О Christ God; from the depths of my heart I offer tears of repentance
unto Thee, Who hast authority over life and death; and in compunction I cry to
Thee: I have sinned! Save me, О Lord!
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.
To the Martyrs: Today the armies of heaven have come for the memorial of
the passion-bearers, to enlighten the minds of the faithful and to illumine the
whole world with grace. Entreated by them, О God, grant us great mercy.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Having received the Word in thy womb at the angel’s salutation, and given
birth to the incarnate God, Christ Emmanuel, О Theotokos, pray thou on behalf
of our souls.
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone IV:
Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before ...”:
О supremely blessed Trinity, the choirs of the incorporeal ones unceasingly
hymn Thee with their immaterial mouths, and standing before Thee with fear,
they cry out: Holy is the Essence in three Hypostases! By their supplications have
mercy on the creation of Thy hands, О Thou Lover of mankind.
The ranks of angels stand with fear before Thy throne, О Master, and ever
enlightened by the rays thereof, unceasingly chant unto Thee the hymn of victory,
О Lord. By their sacred prayers grant peace unto the world and the remission of
our transgressions.
Glory ..., Now & ever .., Theotokion:
O all-immaculate Virgin * who hast given birth to the transcendent God: * do
thou unceasingly entreat Him with the incorporeal ones, * that He grant
forgiveness of transgressions * and correction of life before the end, * to us who,
as is meet, hymn thee with faith and love, ** O thou who alone art all-hymned.
ODE I
Canon of repentance, to our Lord Jesus Christ & His holy martyrs, the acrostic
whereof is “O Savior, save me as Thou didst the harlot of old”, in Tone IV:
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the
mighty strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as
on a timbrel * I may chant a hymn of victory.
О Jesus my Savior, Who saved the prodigal, accepted the weeping of the
harlot, and by Thy goodness justified the publican who sighed: Accept me also,
who turn to Thee though I have committed innumerable sins, and save me.
The fire of evil devoureth my soul like tinder, and kindleth the flame which is
to come. О Long-suffering One and Lover of mankind, extinguish it with the dew
of Thy mercies, granting us tears of repentance.
To the Martyrs: Full of great understanding, the choir of the holy passionbearers, chastely rejecting the foolish counsel and adverse thinking of all the
violators of the law, received divine honors.
To the Martyrs: О wise and all-praised passion-bearers, who in your faith
disdained the beautiful things of this world, ye have inherited heavenly life.
Wherefore, from all the turmoil of the world deliver me, who truly bless you.
Theotokion: О most pure one, most radiant luminary of the Sun of glory:
Enkindle the flame of my soul, which hath been extinguished by despondency,
and ever feed it with the oil of divine works, that I may glorify thee with faith and
love.
Another canon, of the holy incorporeal angels, in Tone IV:
Irmos: Same as the foregoing.
О angels, who as pure intelligences stand before the great and primal Mind,
fed by divine radiance: Illumine me with your rays, hymning the Word Who is the
cause of all, О most glorious ones. (Twice)
Bowing down before God with love, and manifestly limned by the beauties of
God, О glorious archangels, ye have taken your place around Him in orderly
ranks, crying out to the Creator a hymn of victory.
Theotokion: О all-immaculate one, who alone received in thy womb the
Word, Whom the angelic armies ever glorify: Illumine my soul, releasing it from
dark evil thoughts of sin, and enlightening it with the understanding of thine
Offspring.
ODE III
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: From on high didst Thou willingly descend to earth, * O Thou Who
art more exalted than every noetic principality, * and from the uttermost
depths of Hades * thou didst raise up lowly human nature; * for there is
none more holy than Thee, O Lover of mankind.
О Christ God, Who art the never-waning Light, the darkness of the passions
hath surrounded me with the night of life, but in that Thou lovest mankind, save
me, enlightening me with rays of repentance, that I may glorify Thee.
Show me to be an inheritor of the portion of the elect, О Christ my Savior,
cutting me off from the portions of the adversary, and showing me to be cleansed
by tears and almsgiving, that in praise I may ever glorify Thee.
To the Martyrs: Truly dyed red by your blood, your feet ran right swiftly to the
heavens, leaving behind the world of sin, О martyrs, ye co-conversers with the
divine powers.
To the Martyrs: Subjected to wounding, your bodies were exhausted, О
spiritual athletes of Christ, but the power of your souls was strengthened, being
tightly bound by love to Him Who by His will hath created all things.
Theotokion: О Sovereign Lady Mary, who for all hast given birth to the Lord:
Enlighten and free me, who am beset by the passions of my mind and am
darkened by evil.
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: Same as the foregoing.
О Christ Who art hymned by the heavenly choirs: In Thy divine wisdom move
the assemblies of the faithful to hymn the ranks thereof for there is none more
holy than Thee, О Lover of mankind. (Twice)
Sharing in the fervent bonds of love, ye stand as ministers before the primal
Source, unceasingly hymning the one Essence of the beginningless Godhead, О
divine archangels,
Theotokion: О pure Mother who hast given birth unto Christ, thou didst most
splendidly annul the ancient curse of Eve by the blessings of Him Who crowneth
all; for there is none as exceedingly holy as thee, our helper.
ODE IV
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ.
I now fall down before thee as Judge, О Lord. Have pity on me, who am
condemned and in despair; deliver me from Thy just sentence, and grant that I
may stand with Thine elect.
О Lover of mankind, heal me, O Christ, for I have fallen among savage
thieves and been wounded. Pour forth the wine and oil of repentance upon me,
and clothe me in the vesture of my salvation.
To the Martyrs: When your bodies were flayed, О most lauded martyrs, ye
were clothed from on high with, the robe of salvation; stripping bare him who of
old stripped our first father naked, rendering him dead and lifeless.
To the Martyrs: Waxing eloquent before the iniquitous, adorned by piety with
the understanding of the Word of God, О martyrs, ye put to shame all the
ungodly sages and rhetors, slaying the enemy.
Theotokion: Like rain, Jesus the Abyss of wisdom, descended upon thee, О
Virgin Birthgiver of God, finding thee alone to be pure; thereby restraining the
grievous torrents of ungodliness with divine grace.
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: Same as the foregoing.
With unapproachable power Thou didst bring forth the heavenly intelligences
from non-existence, О transcendent Word of God; and with Thine ineffable glory
adorned them, who cry aloud: Glory to Thy power, О Christ!
Guided by the Spirit and His reins, and illumined by divine rays, the heavenly
hosts formed themselves into unbroken ranks, worshipping the one Godhead, the
Cause of all.
Thy ministering radiances were deemed worthy to gaze upon the comely
beauty of Thy countenance; and, having thereby received understanding, they cry
out to Thee: Glory to Thy power, О Christ!
Theotokion: The Virgin Queen now standeth, arrayed in golden vesture,
before the King her Son, incomparably more exalted than the angels, who cry out:
Glory to Thy power, О Christ!
ODE V
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Now I shall arise said God prophetically, * now I shall be glorified,
now I shall be exalted, * elevating fallen human nature, * which I received
from the Virgin, * to the noetic light of My divinity.
О how I shall stand before Thee, the Judge and God of all, condemned and
accused of all the evils wherein I have mindlessly and willingly sinned, making
myself wholly unprofitable!
Save me, О Lord, for I have been filled with many evils; and I pray: Heal my
sins and grievous sores, and leave me not to perish alone, for I have sinned greatly
against Thee, О my Jesus.
To the Martyrs: Manifestly finding a blessed end, the spiritual athletes have
received glory, glorifying Christ the Appointer of the contest, with their bodily
members, having manfully resolved to suffer wounds and stripes.
To the Martyrs: О blessed spiritual athletes of Christ, by your godly and
beautiful way of life ye have inherited the riches of heaven, imperishable crowns,
never-waning light, and a habitation unmade by men’s hands, which waxeth not
old.
Theotokion: The voices of the prophets foretold thy wonders, О most pure
one, calling thee the mountain, the door, and the radiant lamp, from whence the
wondrous Light truly illumineth the world, О pure one.
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: Same as the foregoing.
With trembling the cherubim and seraphim, the thrones and the divine
archangels, the dominions, powers and principalities, the authorities and the
angels, glorify the one adored Godhead of the Trinity. (Twice)
The angels were shown to be shining radiantly with light, О Christ,
proclaiming Thy resurrection to the venerable women in the world, and freeing
the mind of Thine enemies with the rays of Thy divinity.
Theotokion: О Thou Who wast ineffably born from the Virgin, delivering
mankind from corruption, by the regiments of the angels preserve now Thy
Church, which glorifieth Thee with Orthodox voices.
ODE VI
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many
sins hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O
Greatly-merciful One.
As one mortal, I have neither understanding nor sense, wretch that I am,
possessed of a conscience ever defiled. О God my Creator, let me not utterly
perish!
My deeds, like enemies, will accuse me at Thy judgment-seat, О
Compassionate One; but deliver me quickly from them, О Christ, guiding me to
repentance.
To the Martyrs: The assembly of the violators of the law broke the bones of
the passion-bearers, yet were unable to break their faith, for which they have been
shown to be heirs of God, the Savior of our souls.
To the Martyrs: Like precious stones, the passion-bearers were set upon the
unshakable rock of hope with divine wisdom; and as temples of the Holy Spirit
they have made their abode in the temple of God.
Theotokion: My heart, which hath been darkened by the dark visitations of
sin, do thou illumine with the light which is within thee, О Bride of God, who
hast given birth unto Christ the Sun.
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: Same as the foregoing.
Standing round about the Master, and in purity delighting in the effulgence of
the Source of radiance, О ye angelic armies, enlighten those who hymn you with
faith. (Twice)
О Thou Who in Thy wisdom didst create the angelic choirs, as Master Thou
didst show forth the dominions, powers and seraphim., who honor Thee with
praises.
Theotokion: О Master Christ, Who dost rest upon the most exalted thrones,
preserving all things by Thy divine providence, Thou didst rest in the arms of the
Virgin.
ODE VII
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: The three youths in Babylon, * regarded the tyrant's command as
foolishness, * and cried aloud in the midst of the flame: * Blessed art Thou,
O Lord God of our fathers!
To whom shall I liken thee, О my wretched soul? Woe is me, for I love
unseemly things and fail to seek that which is good! Wherefore, hasten thou
before the end, and exhibit good conduct.
Grant me a shower of tears, that I may be cleansed of mine evils; and leave me
not to perish now, who have sinned against Thee more than all others, О Savior.
To the Martyrs: Bearing in your own bodies the mortality of the Word Who
was slain, ye put deception to death; and having died, О glorious spiritual athletes,
ye heal those brought to death by the passions,
To the Martyrs: What place doth not now have you as enlighteners and a
bulwark, О martyrs? What land is not sanctified by your sufferings and the
dawning of your healings, О glorious ones?
Theotokion: Thou alone remainest a virgin even after giving birth, О Lady,
who art resplendent in virginal beauty; thou alone didst escape the pain of
motherhood: for thou alone hast given birth to God, the Redeemer of our souls.
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: Same as the foregoing.
With the noetic angels as witnesses to what we have done, О my soul, let us
choose their pure life, for they cry out: Blessed art Thou, О Lord God of our
fathers! (Twice)
Purified by a burning coal, the divine Isaiah beheld the seraphim standing
before Thy throne, and he cried aloud: Blessed art Thou, О Lord God of our
fathers!
Theotokion: As thou hast given birth to the Creator and Lord, О Virgin, thou
hast been revealed to be more exalted than the ranks of all the incorporeal beings.
Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, О pure one!
ODE VIII
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All
ye works bless and hymn the Lord.
Having submitted to the passions, I have been revealed to be like irrational
dogs О Word of God Who art without beginning, turn me back to Thee and save
me, who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all yeworks of the Lord!
The boar hath ravaged and laid waste to me like a solitary vineyard cultivated
by the Spirit, О Savior. Deliver me from him. О Word, and straightway show me
to be fruitful for Thee in the virtues.
To the Martyrs: Your bloody skins dyed a divinely woven robe for you, О
martyrs, and, thereby adorned and wearing crowns of victory, ye stand in the
highest before the eternal King.
To the Martyrs: The sacred harmony of the martyrs set at naught the unholy
discord which would have them commit that which is unlawful; and having
suffered lawfully, they have been lawfully crowned by the Master of all.
Theotokion: All creation blesseth thy birthgiving, which hath crowned us with
blessings and removed the curse, О only all-blessed and most glorious one, who
hath filled our race with grace.
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: Same as the foregoing.
As the only immortal Life and Creator, Thou didst fashion the angels to share
in immortal life, teaching them to chant: Bless ye and hymn the Lord! (Twice)
Noetically standing round about Thee, the archangels chant with never-ceasing
voices, divinely honoring Thee as the Master of all: Bless ye and hymn the Lord!
Theotokion: О all-blessed one, the images of the law prefigured thee who hast
given birth unto God Who is united to fleshly matter, but before was immaterial
in His divine essence. О Virgin, we bless thy birthgiving!
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...”, and make prostrations.
ODE IX
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the
Offspring of thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. *
Wherefore, we all magnify thee. 
This is the time for repentance! Why then are we slothful? Why are we sunk in
sleep? Let us put away despondency and feed our lamps with the oil of good
deeds, as it is written, lest we find ourselves standing outside the doors, lamenting.
While there is yet time to repent, О my soul, turn away from the evils which
thou hast committed in knowledge and in ignorance, and cry out unto Him Who
knoweth all things: I have sinned against Thee! Forgive me, О Master, and disdain
me not, who am unworthy!
To the Martyrs: In places of glory, in resting-places of honor Christ hath with
exceeding clarity assembled the saints who suffered, from every land and city; and
they now shine forth in gladness upon the Church of the firstborn.
To the Martyrs: Illumined by the rays of the divine Spirit, the all-precious
shrines of Thy holy martyrs most gloriously emit the radiance of healings,
dispelling the pangs of infirmities, О only greatly merciful Lord.
Theotokion: Enlighten my soul with rays from the light that is within thee, О
Bride of God, and raise it up, for it lieth in the pit of destruction, defeating the
enemies who ever assail my heart, and impel it toward the passions.
Canon of the Angels
Irmos: The ineffable hidden mystery of God hath been revealed in thee, * O
most pure Virgin; * for in His tender compassion * God become incarnate
of thee. * Wherefore, we magnify thee as the Theotokos.
Hymning the Mind, the Father and Origin of the Son and the Spirit, and
having received gifts of divine grace, О angels, be ye assiduously quick to send
them down upon us. (Twice)
Beautifully adorned with the gift of incorruption and with grace, hymning
Thee, the eternal Source of incorruption, О Christ, the divine archangels magnify
Thee as their Benefactor.
Theotokion: О Mother of God, we, the faithful, know thee to be the bridalchamber and dwelling-place of the ineffable Incarnation, and the ark of the law;
wherefore, we unceasingly magnify thee.
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...”, and a prostration.
Litany: Let us complete ..., Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms.
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of repentance, in Tone IV:
Wash me with my tears, O Savior, for I am defiled by many sins. Wherefore I
fall down before Thee crying: ‘I have sinned, have mercy upon me, O God’.
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons.
I am a sheep of Thy rational flock, and to Thee do I flee for refuge, O Good
Shepherd. I have gone astray, do Thou O God, have mercy on me.
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our
hands do Thou guide aright.
Who is not filled with, awe, beholding the good contest wherein ye struggled,
О holy martyrs? How have ye, who are fleshly beings, vanquished the incorporeal
foe, confessing Christ and having armed yourselves with His Cross? Wherefore, as
is meet, ye have been shown to be expellers of the demons and opponents of the
barbarians, unceasingly praying that our souls be saved.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
O Theotokos, Queen of all, * thou praise of the Orthodox: * cast down the
proud arrogance of the heretics, * and put to shame the countenances of those *
who neither bow down before nor honor thy precious image, ** O most pure
one.
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia.
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal.
ON MONDAY MORNING: TONE IV
AT LITURGY
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone IV:
Of old was Adam banished from paradise through the tree, but by the tree of
the Cross hath the thief come to dwell in paradise: the one by tasting rejected the
commandment of the Creator, but the other, crucified with Christ, confessed the
hidden God, crying aloud: Remember me in Thy kingdom!
I have sinned more than all others on earth, and I fear the implacable tribunal
which is to come, О Supremely good One. Preserve me uncondemned then, and
deliver me from torment, granting me repentance which washeth away all
defilements, in that Thou art the Lover of mankind.
Standing now before the Master of all, О cherubim and seraphim, ye
authorities, thrones, archangels, dominions and hosts, ye holy angels and most
exalted principalities, ask remission offenses and correction of life for all who cry
out with faith: Remember us in Thy kingdom!
To the Martyrs: Cast into the fire, ye utterly consumed the tinder of deception,
О passion-bearers of Christ; and in the multitude of your blood ye drowned the
serpent of the deep; and having won the victory, ye rejoice with the armies on
high, praying earnestly that we be saved.
Glory ..., О Effulgence of the threefold Sun who shinest in the fullness of the
world, dispelling the cruel passions of my soul: Send down the radiance of light
and cleansing offenses unto me who now cry out with faith to Thee, the
beginningless Father, the Son Who is co-enthroned with Him, and the Spirit. О
Trinity, all-accomplishing Power, save us!
Now & ever ..., О pure one, have pity on me who ever sin and am greatly
hindered by slothfulness, and reveal to me examples of repentance, granting
compunction to my perplexed soul, О most pure unashamed hope. And
remember us who hymn thee with love and cry out with: faith, О all-hymned
Virgin.
On Monday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV:
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: He maketh His angels spirits, * and His ministers a flame of fire.
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been
magnified exceedingly. 
Alleluia, in Tone V: Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him all ye His
hosts.
Verse: For He spake, and they came to be; He commanded, and they were
created.
Communion Verse: He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame
of fire. 