WEDNESDAY EVENING: TONE IV
AT VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 3 Stichera of the apostles, in Tone IV:
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness.
О ye glorious ones, who with a most mighty understanding waged war,
arraying yourselves against the wicked foe, for having valiantly armed yourselves
with the weaponry of the Spirit, ye destroyed all the might of the demons, who
seize men’s souls like plunder; wherefore, we honor you throughout the ages, О
apostles.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
Spreading out the net of the Faith in the form of the Cross, Thy twelve divine
apostles dragged all the nations to the knowledge of Thee, О Christ, and dried up
the salty sea of the passions; wherefore, I beseech Thee: By their wholly well
pleasing supplications recall me from the depths of transgressions.
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
With divine hymns let the divinely chosen and all-honorable twelve apostles be
praised: Peter, Paul and James, Luke and John, Matthew and Thomas, Mark,
Simon and Philip, the most glorious Andrew and Matthias, with the godly and
most wise Bartholomew, and the seventy others.
Then the Stichera of the saint, from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these
Stichera of the holy & great wonderworker Nicholas, in Tone IV:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
With divine myrrh, the divine grace of the Spirit anointed thee the chief
hierarch of the people of Myra, for with most sacred virtues as with myrrh thou
hast perfumed the ends of the earth, and with thy sweet-smelling supplications
thou dost ever dispel the fetid passions; wherefore, we glorify thee with faith and
keep thine all-holy memory, О Nicholas.
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
As is meet, we bless thee, О Nicholas, as an ever-shining lamp, a universal
luminary who hath shone forth in the firmament of the Church and enlightened
the world, driving away the gloom of grievous misfortunes, dispelling the winter
of griefs, and creating profound serenity.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
As one compassionate, and right loving, as a most fervent deliverer, and a true
intercessor for the faithful who ask thine aid, О most sacred father Nicholas,
appearing and manifesting thyself in dreams, thou didst save those who were
about to die unjustly, О fellow citizen with the angels, who standest with the
venerable and the righteous.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
O all-pure one, * who hath contained the infinite God in thy womb * Who, in
His love for mankind, hath become a man, * and hath received our substance
from thee, * deifying it: * disdain me not who am now sorrowing, * but quickly
take pity * and free me from divers enemies ** and the malice of the evil one.
Then, “О Joyous Light ...”, the Prokeimenon in Tone V:
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do
Thou judge me.
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my
mouth.
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the apostles, in Tone IV:
Thou didst enlighten the choir of the apostles with the Holy Spirit, О Christ
God. By them wash away the defilement of our sin, and have mercy on us.
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress,
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us.
Thy Holy Spirit revealed the illiterate disciples to be teachers, О Christ God,
and set at naught the deception of the pagans with their greatly eloquent harmony,
in that He is almighty.
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.
To the Martyrs: О martyrs of the Lord, ye animate sacrifices, noetic wholeburnt offerings, perfect offerings to God, ye lambs who know God and are
known of Him, and to whose fold the wolves have no entry: Pray ye that with you
we also may be tended by the water of peace.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Deliver us from our needs, * O Mother of Christ God, * thou who hast given
birth to the Creator of all, * that we all may cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O thou
who alone art the intercessor for our souls!
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion through Our
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal.
WEDNESDAY NIGHT: TONE IV
AT COMPLINE
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos
ODE I
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old,
* and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the
power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.
Truly, yea surely, thou hast given birth to the Lord God, and truly, yea surely,
thou alone hast been called the Theotokos, О pure one. Wherefore, with faith we
hymn and glorify thee as is meet.
From thee, О most pure one, hath the Star shone forth out of Jacob, Who as
God hath numbered the multitude of the stars. Wherefore, by His effulgence
remove thou the darkness of my sins.
Glory ..., I know thee to be clearly the rational bridal-chamber of the
incarnation of God, О pure and all-immaculate one; and I entreat thee to deliver
me from carnal passions, tribulations, temptations and evil circumstances.
Now & ever ..., In that thou art the ladder of the coming of the Almighty unto
us, whereby God descended to the earth, raise me up to heaven from earthly
carnal passions, and lead me to God.
ODE III
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more
holy than Thee, O Lover of mankind.
Thou art a wellspring pouring forth consolation upon the sorrowful, О Lady;
wherefore, pour forth upon me a torrent of the waters of thy supplications, and
quench thou the furnace of my passions.
О pure one who hast healed the grievous wounds of our nature by giving birth
to the Creator and Lord, heal me who am wounded by unseemly thoughts.
Glory ..., Tempest-tossed amid the deep of my many transgressions, passions
and temptations, О all-immaculate one, by thine aid I hasten to the most tranquil
haven.
Now & ever ..., By the divine Rain which descended into thy womb as upon a
fleece, and with thy supplications, bedew thou my heart, which is aflame with the
fire of the passions.
ODE IV
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the
Cross, * the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: *
Glory be to Thy power, O Lord!
From the flowing ointment of thy Son, the Perfume of the life of all, О pure
one, pour forth the myrrh of dispassion upon my soul, and remove from it the
mire of its passions.
With the hyssop of thy prayers sprinkle me who am defiled with the mire of
sin, О Lady; wash me clean and cleanse me of the impurity of my passions, and
show me to be a dwelling- place of Christ.
Glory ..., I beseech thee, О most pure one, thou book inscribed and sealed by
the finger of God: with the finger of thy supplications prescribe for me the
remission of sins, and deliver me from perils.
Now & ever ..., Thou wast the temple of God out of all the holy mountains, as
the prophet said of old. Show me to be a pure temple of Christ, О Lady, by thine
aid.
ODE V
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy
light turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises
in faith.
Knowing thee to be the dew of Hermon which descended upon Sion, О
Birthgiver of God, I pray that thou quench the burning of my flesh.
As the paradise of life, О Theotokos, do thou quickly deliver me from deadly
sin and the many and varied passions.
Glory ..., О pure one, thou art the noetic phial of alabaster. Wherefore, with
the perfume of the Myrrh Who was poured forth upon earth from heaven, do
thou fill me now.
Now & ever ..., Thou hast restored mankind who was inclined toward
corruption, О Bride of God. Wherefore, lead me up now from the depths of
transgressions and the passions.
ODE VI
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * 'I will sacrifice unto
Thee with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the
demons' * by the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side.
Having become the exceedingly beauteous palace of the King of glory, О
glorious Lady, thou hast glorified mankind; wherefore, grant incorrupt glory to
me.
With pure incorruption thou hast allayed the vile corruption of nature, О most
pure one; wherefore, dry up the torrents of my passions and the rivers of my
carnal knowledge.
Glory ..., Quell thou the passionate movements of my body and tame thou the
uprisings of my flesh, making them subject to my mind as if they were a foal, О
pure one, lulling them to sleep by thy prayers.
Now & ever ..., I hymn thee who hast given birth to the supremely hymned
God, О Maiden, and I beseech thee: О Theotokos, deliver and save me from
dreadful strife and everlasting condemnation.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone IV:
О intercessor unopposed, О Birthgiver of God, thou ready advocate for those
who have recourse unto thee: deliver me from misfortunes, and disdain me not, О
helper of all.
ODE VII
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, *
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord.
In that thou art the fiery and God-bearing bush, О pure one, burn up the
thorns of my wicked contemplations, illumine the thoughts of my soul, and dry up
the abyss of my passions.
Thou alone hast manifestly acquired the majesty and divine glory of eternity
on the earth, having been revealed to be another heaven; wherefore, set at naught
mine enemies, the boastful demons.
Glory ..., О divine vessel of loving-kindness and goodness, pour forth upon
me the riches of thy compassions in abundance, washing away the defilement of
my transgressions, and quench thou the burning of my flesh.
Now & ever ..., Having lived prodigally, I have ever wasted the spiritual wealth
given me by God in carnal pleasures; yet by thy supplications do thou grant me
justification, О Virgin.
ODE VIII
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions jaws * in their den;
* while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the
power of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the
Lord.
Break thou the chains of my transgressions and quell thou the uprisings of my
body, cut down mine evil thoughts and quickly cleanse thy servant of secret
thoughts, О Theotokos, thou intercessor and help of all the faithful.
О most pure one, who hast been shown to be the unquarried mountain of
God, rich, densely wooded and overshadowed, shield me with the shelter of thy
supplications, deliver me from the snares of the hunters, and preserve me from
the darts of the demons and from vile thoughts.
Glory ..., О Lady, grant that I may receive the fear of God and the spirit of
compunction within me, and that I may bring forth a virtuous life; and render me
frightful to the wicked demons and a partaker of the divine glory of the angelic
choirs.
Now & ever ..., Quickly open unto me the doors of life, the portals of my
hope, О most pure one; guide me to life without end, and show me, thy servant,
to be an heir to the kingdom of heaven and a partaker of the divine glory of the
saints.
ODE IX
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the
Offspring of thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. *
Wherefore, we all magnify thee.
In thy prayers look down upon thy servant, О pure one; go thou quickly
before me, and deliver me from the invisible foes who afflict and oppress me.
Save me from misfortunes, sorrows and multifarious evil circumstances.
О Virgin, heal me who am condemned and wounded by the stripes of sin, and
deliver me from wicked thoughts, О thou who hast given birth to the omnipotent
Word, the Good One Who lovest mankind.
Glory ..., For the sake of Adam who of old fell into sin, thy Son, О
exceedingly good one, Who hath dominion over life and death, partook of death;
wherefore, by thy supplications raise me up from the passions and the fall.
Now & ever ..., О Theotokos, from misfortunes and falls, from sin and
tempest, from the passions of the body, from the billows and violent griefs of life,
and from wicked malice save those who have recourse unto thee.
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ...,
Troparia, and the rest as usual. Dismissal.
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE IV
AT MATINS
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,
the Sessional hymns of the apostles, in Tone IV:
О first enthroned apostles and universal teachers, entreat the Master of all,
that He grant peace to the whole world and great mercy to our souls.
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words
unto the end of the world.
О Christ, Thou hast shown Thy disciples to be beacons unto the ends of the
earth, shining forth the knowledge of Thee upon souls in darkness; and having for
their sake cast the deception of idolatry into darkness, О Master, Thou hast
enlightened the world with teachings of piety. By their intercessions save Thou
our souls.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Hearken speedily to our supplications, О Lady, and bear them to thy Son and
God. Remedy the adverse circumstances of those who have recourse unto thee, О
most pure Sovereign Lady, and confound the ambushes and fury of those who
now array themselves against thy servants, О Virgin.
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone IV:
Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before ...”:
Your tidings raced round about the whole earth and rendered foolish the false
wisdom of the unwise, О glorious apostles; drawing mankind from the depths of
delusion, and showing the path of salvation unto all; wherefore, we now call you
blessed, as is meet.
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament
proclaimeth the work of His hands.
О Savior, Thou hast shown Thy disciples to the world as preachers of the
Faith, through them guiding the world to the knowledge of Thee; for with rays of
the word they shed light upon all, dispelling the darkness of ignorance with faith.
By their supplications save Thou our souls.
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.
To the Martyrs: In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, received imperishable
crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they set at naught the
tyrants and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By their supplications save
Thou our souls. 
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
О Lady, hearken to thy servant, for I cry out from the depths of my painwracked soul, and grant me the remission of my many evils, for thee do I have as
an intercessor day and night. О Theotokos, deliver me from the fire of Gehenna,
and set me at the right hand of thy Son and God.
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone IV:
Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before ...”:
The Sun of righteousness emitted you like rays to enlighten the whole earth, О
glorious apostles. By your divine prayers ye illumine all with the never-waning
light of God, enlightening those who celebrate your holy memory with faith.
Go thou quickly on before, О Nicholas, and save thy servants from the
misfortunes and tribulations which assail us, for thou hast boldness before God
the Creator; wherefore, come now speedily unto those who call upon thee with
faith, granting us thine intercession and protection.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
O thou who art more exalted than all created beings, I am in doubt as to how
to worthily hymn thee O Theotokos, have mercy upon us for we freely entreat
thee.
ODE I
Canon of the holy, glorious & all-praised apostles, the composition of
Theophanes, in Tone IV:
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old,
* and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the
power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.
As divine instruments of the Comforter, ever heralding Him with divine
inspirations, the right glorious apostles of Christ have played for us a truly salvific
song. (Twice)
О glorious eye-witnesses of Christ, grant enlightenment unto me who languish
on the bed of slothfulness and am grievously wasting away in the death of sin
through sickness of spirit.
О apostles who by your discourse loosed the irrationality of the nations, by the
grace of the Comforter enlighten my heart, which hath, been grievously darkened
by irrational acts, О apostles.
Theotokion: Thou didst remain an incorrupt virgin even after birthgiving, О
thou who in a manner transcending understanding hast given birth to Him Who
for our sake appeared on earth. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He enlighten
our souls.
Another canon, of the holy Nicholas, the acrostic whereof is “This is the fourth
weaving for Nicholas”, the composition of Joseph, in the same tone:
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the
mighty strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as
on a timbrel * I may chant a hymn of victory.
Having inherited the life which is devoid of grief, О blessed one, ever filled
with, spiritual joy drive all grief from my soul, I pray, that, rejoicing, I may glorify
thee, О most sacred father Nicholas.
Thou wast set upon the lampstand of exalted virtues, and like a lamp dost
enlighten the hearts of the faithful, О holy hierarch Nicholas; wherefore, I entreat
thee with faith: By thy luminous prayers drive away darkness from my soul.
О most wise father, overwhelmed now by the abyss of this corrupt life and
divers temptations, fleeing unto thee, I cry: Let me find thee to be a helmsman
who by thy divine supplications transformeth the storm into calm.
Theotokion: О pure one, who art possessed of ever-vigilant prayer, lull to
sleep the passions of our souls by thy sacred mediations, granting us divine and
saving watchfulness for the fulfillment of the will of God.
ODE III
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O
Lord, art my strength, * my refuge and foundation.
The currents of Thy disciples, Thy noetic rivers, О God, gladden Thy city with
sanctity. (Twice)
О citizens of heaven, fellow ministers with the noetic ranks, all-glorious
apostles: Deliver us from all tribulation.
О Christ Who established the apostles, Thy noetic heavens: By their prayers
establish me steadfast upon the rock of Thy will, in that Thou art full of lovingkindness.
Theotokion: In that the Mother who gave Thee birth in purity prayeth with
the choir of the disciples, О Lord, grant us Thy mercies.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more
holy than Thee, O Lover of mankind.
Thou wast revealed to be a sword slaughtering the rampaging foe, О Nicholas;
wherefore, preserve us unharmed by their temptations, that we may do the will of
God.
Heal the broken state of my soul, О holy hierarch who broke all the snares
and traps of the enemy, that with faith I may honor thee, mine intercessor.
О father Nicholas, who didst raze the lifeless temple of Venus, by thy divine
mediations demolish the passionate fantasies of my mind.
Theotokion: Thee have we acquired as an intercessor, О most pure Virgin.
Transform our grief into joy, and deliver us from the sorrow which giveth rise to
death.
ODE IV
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the
Cross, * the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: *
Glory be to Thy power, O Lord!
Thou didst ride Thy chosen steeds into the sea, О Lover of mankind, and they
roiled the waters of false belief, proclaiming to all the true understanding of Thee.
(Twice)
О glorious apostles, ye stars who have enlightened the noetic firmament of the
Church with piety: Deliver me from the night of ignorance and transgressions.
Having been shown to be like well-honed arrows, О apostles, quench now the
burning arrows of mine evil, making steadfast my thoughts.
Theotokion: By the prayers of her who gave birth to Thee, and those of Thy
sacred apostles, О Christ, heal my soul with their effective remedies, for it hath
been embittered by venom through the sting of the adversary.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ.
Thy most glorious life, О Nicholas, hath everywhere shown thee to be most
glorious, radiant with divine miracles, the adornment of hierarchs and boast of all
who honor thee with hymns of joy,
Resplendent with the divine rays of humble-mindedness, thou didst praise
God on thine exalted cathedra, О blessed one, and by thy right acceptable
supplications, О wise father, thou hast caused us to also partake of them.
Afire with priestly zeal, thou didst deliver those unjustly led forth to be slain,
О father; wherefore, we cry out to thee: Rescue us thus from the perils which
cruelly slay the heart.
Joyfully going about the heavens, О father Nicholas, stand forth invisibly
before all who call upon thee, easing the sickness of our souls and granting us
consolation in a godly manner.
Theotokion: The angelic armies are filled with awe, О most pure one, hymning
the majesty of thy divine birthgiving. With them pray, О Virgin, that all may be
saved who bless thee with pure faith.
ODE V
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy
light turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises
in faith.
The Cause of all gave you to drink of noetic gladness, О glorious apostles,
who art branches putting forth the grapes of life. (Twice)
О apostles, unto the light of the commandments of God guide those who
mindlessly remain in the darkness of despondency of soul.
Deliver us from transgressions of soul and from the judgment which is to
come, from corruption and misfortunes, О blessed apostles.
Theotokion: Save me, О God, Thou Lover of mankind! Save me by the
supplications of her who ineffably gave birth to Thee, and of all Thy divine
apostles!
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise
early to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of
Thy Father's divinity, * O Lover of mankind.
Dying, О wise father, thou didst set like the sun, but in Christ thou hast shone
forth in the luminous effulgence of thy miracles, illumining the whole world, О
Nicholas.
О sacred Nicholas, hearken unto us in these days, when temptations and
tribulations befall us, relieving all oppression by the grace of the Spirit Who
dwelleth within thee.
In that I have a soul broken by the passions of life, I call upon thee for help, О
sacred Nicholas: Hasten thou, and grant me perfect healing, entreating the
Supremely good One!
Theotokion: Beholding thee with noetic eyes, О Virgin, Isaiah cried out:
Behold, Jesus the Lord will be born from the Virgin, the divine Maiden, unto the
regeneration of mankind!
ODE VI
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * 'I will sacrifice unto
Thee with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the
demons' * by the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side.
О divinely chosen sheep of the good Shepherd, ye who are scattered
throughout the world, by faith ye transformed all the bestiality of the wolves into
the meekness of lambs. (Twice)
O apostles, ye right fruitful trees of divine paradise, transform all the
barrenness of my soul into the goodly fruitfulness of virtuous ways.
I have been wounded by the sword of the passions and deadened thereby. О
glorious ones, who received from Christ the grace to resurrect the dead, give life
to my wretched soul, which hath been slain.
Theotokion: Still Thou the raging storm of my soul, О compassionate God of
all, by the supplications of the Theotokos who gave birth to Thee, and of Thine
apostles and martyrs.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many
sins hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O
Greatly-merciful One.
Thou wast strengthened by the might of the Savior, О divinely wise one, who
art able to destroy the invisible foe. By thy prayers, О father Nicholas, deliver us
from his grievous harm.
By thy sacred supplications, О most glorious Nicholas, deliver us from
torment in Gehenna, and from the most harmful oppression of wicked men.
The military officers, who of old were unjustly sentenced to die, were
delivered by thine intercessions, О right wondrous one. Rescue us from all harm
as thou didst them.
Theotokion: Thy people and city entreat thee, О Mother of God: Rescue us
from all need, О all-holy Lady, and from eternal damnation in the life to come.
ODE VII
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, *
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord.
With the strength of your all-holy preaching, О true apostles of Christ, ye have
broken the winter of deception and enlightened the minds of the faithful with the
knowledge of God. (Twice)
Ever pouring forth fragrant myrrh, О divine disciples, fill with the sweet smell
of noetic myrrh those who have recourse unto you, and drive away the foulsmelling passions.
О glorious disciples of the incorrupt Word, save me, who am become corrupt
through carnal offenses, yet who sing: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy
glory, О Lord!
Theotokion: The choir of the angels, the choir of the martyrs and Thine
apostles, О Word, ever entreat the magnitude of Thy loving-kindness: Through
the Theotokos have pity on all, in that Thou art compassionate.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: The three youths in Babylon, * regarded the tyrant's command as
foolishness, * and cried aloud in the midst of the flame: * Blessed art Thou,
O Lord God of our fathers!
О holy Nicholas, entreat the one Creator of all, Who resteth in the saints, that
He sanctify us and send down upon us His rich mercies.
Holy, righteous and meek, gentle and humble, О glorious one, thou didst
ascend to the most glorious heights of the priesthood, working signs and wonders.
Keeping the laws of God, О venerable one, thou wast revealed to be a most
pure temple of God; wherefore, we cry aloud: О all-blessed one, deliver thy
servants from all iniquity!
Theotokion: Put down the uprisings of the passions of my soul, and by thy
vigilant supplications grant me watchfulness, О Maiden, driving far away the
slumber of despondency.
ODE VIII
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions jaws * in their den;
* while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the
power of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the
Lord.
О mouths of Christ inspired by the fire of the Spirit, ye who closed the
mouths of the unrestrained and spread the preaching of salvation everywhere: Ye
have delivered from the jaws of the noetic wolf those who cry aloud: Hymn the
Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! (Twice)
Sound ye the melodious trumpets of Christ round about my deadened soul, О
glorious apostles, and raise it up from the grave of despair and despondency, that
it may chant: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout
all ages!
By the prayers of Thy disciples, О Christ, disdain me not, who with depravity
of mind have trampled underfoot Thy laws and, a prodigal, have stumbled
headlong into the abyss, and am ever captive to wicked habits.
Theotokion: О Mary, Sovereign Lady of all, by thy supplications free me, who
am dominated by the serpent and ever sin; that I may labor for Christ in a pure
life, and chant: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout
all ages!
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All
ye works bless and hymn the Lord.
Making proclamation concerning divine things, О Nicholas, thou didst clearly
shut the gaping mouths of the iniquitous, and from the corruption of Arius
delivered many, who chant in a Orthodox manner: Hymn the Lord, and
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!
О holy one, thou namesake of victory, by thy prayers show us forth, who ever
pray to thee with faith, as victors over the passions which engender death, and
over the lying tongue of all-iniquitous men.
Send down upon us thy salvific help, O wonderworker Nicholas, that we may
be succored in the day of need when we call upon thee with faith, we pray thee.
Triadicon: In an Orthodox manner, О ye faithful, let us worship the Holy
Trinity, glorifying the Father, the Son and the all-holy Spirit, crying aloud: Bless
and hymn the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!
Theotokion: Grant me thy mercy, О blessed and all-pure one who hast given
birth to the exceedingly merciful Word; stand before me at the hour of judgment,
and deliver me then from damnation, О pure one.
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...”, and make prostrations.
ODE IX
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos.
О apostles, ye chosen stones of the Stone set as the Chief Cornerstone, ye
have built up the hearts of all the faithful, toppling the foundations of the enemy
with the rock of the Faith. (Twice)
О apostles, who received from Christ the authority to loose and to bind, loose
the bonds of mine evils, bind me to the love of God, and cause me to share in the
kingdom, of God.
О divine clouds of the Master, with divine showers water my heart, which hath
become dry through every evil deed, and show it to be fruitful.
Theotokion: With the holy angels, with the divine apostles and the glorious
martyrs, О most pure Birthgiver of God, entreat thy Son and God, that He deliver
our souls from misfortunes.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the
Offspring of thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. *
Wherefore, we all magnify thee.
Ever working healings, О venerable Nicholas, thy tomb poureth forth fragrant
myrrh upon those who approach it with faith and love, burying the assaults of
illness; wherefore, we all call thee blessed.
Like the sun thou dost shed light upon the whole world, О divinely blessed
Nicholas, driving away the darkness of grievous circumstances with the radiance
of divine miracles by thy sacred mediations, О adornment of hierarchs.
As is thy wont, have pity, О Nicholas, upon those who are ever cruelly
tempest-tossed by the circumstances of life, the deceptions of the demons and the
temptations of wicked men, that we may all call thee blessed.
О my soul, be thou mindful of the dread day and hour, when the Master will
call thee to trial and judge thy secret acts; and cry out to Him: О Savior, save me
by the prayers of Nicholas!
Theotokion: We joyfully offer thee the salutation of the divine Gabriel, and we
cry aloud: Rejoice, О paradise who ever hast within thee the Tree of life, О most
glorious palace of the Word! Rejoice, О all-immaculate Virgin!
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...”, and a prostration.
Litany: Let us complete ..., Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms.
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the apostles, in Tone IV:
Thou didst enlighten the choir of the apostles with the Holy Spirit, О Christ
God. For their sake, wash away the defilement of our sin, and have mercy on us.
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons.
Thy Holy Spirit revealed the illiterate disciples to be teachers, О Christ God,
and set at naught the delusion of the pagans with their greatly eloquent harmony,
in that He is almighty.
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our
hands do Thou guide aright.
To the Martyrs: Precious is the death of Thy saints, О Lord! For broken by
swords, fire and freezing cold, they poured forth their blood, placing in Thee their
hope, that they would receive reward for their toils. They endured, О Savior, and
have received great mercy from Thee.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Thee have we obtained as a rampart, * O most pure Theotokos, * a favorably
calm harbor and confirmation. * Wherefore, I who am tempest-tossed in this life
beseech thee: ** do thou guide me and save me!
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia.
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal.
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE IV
AT LITURGY
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone IV:
Of old Adam was banished from paradise through the tree, but by the tree of
the Cross the thief hath come to dwell in paradise: the one by tasting rejected the
commandment of the Creator, but the other, crucified with Christ, confessed the
hidden God, crying out: Remember me in Thy kingdom!
As reason-endowed members of the flock of the Lamb and Shepherd, О wise
ones, ye were sent by Him like lambs into the midst of wolves to preach God; and
ye transformed their savagery into meekness, so that with faith they cry out with
steadfast intent: Remember us, О Savior, in Thy kingdom!
Passing over the fullness of the earth, like radiant stars, О apostles of the
Lord, ye loosed those darkened by deception and shone the light of salvation
upon the deceived; wherefore, we call you blessed, О preachers of Christ, and ask:
Ever pray to the Lord for us!
To the Martyrs: Consumed by material fire and slain, О wise and blessed ones,
ye utterly consumed the tinder of bitter polytheism; and ye now pour forth
streams of healings upon those who approach you with faith, and cry out fervently
unto Christ, exclaiming: Remember us in Thy kingdom!
Glory ..., With unwavering resolve and sobriety of mind let us say unto Him
Who in the highest is enthroned with the Father and the Spirit: О indivisible
Trinity, Who in the beginning created all things by Thy word and enlightenest all:
In Thy kingdom remember us who call upon Thee with faith!
Now & ever ..., Thou art truly the never-fading wreath of the passion-bearers,
О Birthgiver of God, joy of the apostles, all-immaculate Maiden. With them, О
Lady, ask deliverance from transgressions and correction of life for us who
petition thee with faith and cry out to thee: Rejoice, О thou who art most truly the
treasury of good things!
On Thursday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII:
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth,
* and their words unto the ends of the world.
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
proclaimeth the work of His hands. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, 0 Lord, and
Thy truth in the congregation of saints.
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their
words unto the ends of the world. 