TONE FIVE
ON SATURDAY EVENING
AT LITTLE VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 4 Stichera:
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone V.
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
By Thy precious Cross, O Christ, * Thou hast shamed the devil, * and by Thy
Resurrection Thou hast blunted the sting of sin, * and saved us from the gates of
death: ** we glorify Thee, the Only-begotten One.
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
Repeat: By Thy precious Cross, O Christ ...,
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples
He who hath granted Resurrection to mankind, * was led as a sheep to the
slaughter; * the princes of Hades trembled before Him * and the gates of
lamentations were lifted up; * for Christ the King of glory entered therein, *
saying to those in bondage: 'Come forth!' ** and to those in darkness: 'Reveal
yourselves!'
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
O great wonder! * Having suffered in the flesh through his love for mankind, *
the Creator of all things visible and invisible, * hath arisen as immortal. * Come O
ye descendents of the nations, * let us worship Him; * for delivered from
deception by his compassion, ** we have learned to hymn one God in three
Hypostases.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion, in Tone V:
Let us honor the God-worthy and honorable Maiden, * more honorable than
the Cherubim. * For the Creator of all things, having deigned to become a man *
ineffably made his abode within her. * O strangest of deeds and wondrous
mysteries! * Who would not be amazed upon hearing that God hath become a
man? * Yet there was no change in Him, * having passed through the gates of
virginity without diminishing it, * as the Prophet hath said; * No man shall ever
pass through this gate, ** except the Lord, the God of Israel, who hath great
mercy.
Then “O Joyous Light ...”:
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...”, with its verses.
After “Vouchsafe O Lord ...”:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Theotokos, in Tone V:
With voices of song we magnify Thee, O Christ, * the Savior incarnate, * yet
not separated from heaven, * for as the Lord who lovest mankind * Thou hast
suffered the cross and death for the sake of our race, * overthrowing the gates of
Hades, * and rising on the third day, ** saving our souls.
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation.
My hands I stretch out towards thee, * my unclean lips I open in supplication,
* I bend the knee of my heart and in spirit I now touch thy most pure feet, O
pure Virgin, * falling down before thee. * Heal my pains and, in thy lovingkindness, * treat my many and incurable wounds. * Deliver me from adversaries
visible and invisible. * Lighten the burden of my sloth, * that I may praise and
glorify thee ** through whom the world hath found God’s great mercy.
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear; * and forget
thine own people and thy father’s house.
Rejoice, O all-immaculate Virgin, * beyond telling thou didst conceive and
give birth in the flesh * to the Son of God, * who from thy blood truly took that
which is ours, * with a soul that was rational and possessing free will. * For having
put on the cloth of Adam yet without defect, * He refashioned and saved
mankind. * Therefore Christ is proclaimed to us as being in two natures, *
showing in Himself the characteristics of them both. ** Implore Him that His
great mercy be granted unto our souls.
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance.
Rejoice!, thou beauty of Jacob, * whom God hath chosen and loved; * door of
the saved, flame-bearing tongs, * abolition of the curse, O most blessed Maiden. *
Thou art the womb that hath contained God, * the righting of the fallen, holier
than the Cherubim, * higher than all creation, * a sight hard to look upon, *
strangest report, inexpressible sayings. * Thou hast shown thyself to be the chariot
of the Word, * the cloud from which dawned the Sun that doth shed his light
even upon me ** and granteth unto those in darkness his great mercy.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
The prophecies concerning thee have been fulfilled, O pure Virgin; * for one
of the Prophets foretold thee as the Gate in Eden * facing towards the east
through which none had passed, * except the Creator of thee and all the world. * 
Another saw thee as a Bush aflame with fire, * because in thee there dwelt the fire
of the Godhead * and yet thou hast remained unburned. * Another saw thee as a
holy Mountain * from which was hewn without the hand of man a cornerstone *
and with it the image of the noetic Nebuchadnezzar hath been crushed. * Truly
great and wondrous is the mystery that hath been manifest in thee, * wherefore we
glorify thee, ** for through thee salvation hath come to our souls.
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion. Then:
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone V:
Let us, O faithful, praise and worship the Word * Who is co-beginningless
with the Father and the Spirit, * and Who was born of the Virgin for our
salvation; * for He was pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh * and to endure
death, ** and to raise the dead by His glorious Resurrection.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
And the Dismissal.
AT GREAT VESPERS
On “Lord I have cried ...”, 10 Stichera: 7 Resurrection Stichera and 3 of the
Saint of the day, or 4 and 6 if the Menaion service is of Polyeleos rank.
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone V:
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.
By Thy precious Cross, O Christ, * Thou hast shamed the devil, * and by Thy
Resurrection Thou hast blunted the sting of sin, * and saved us from the gates of
death: ** we glorify Thee, the Only-begotten One.
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward
me.
He who hath granted Resurrection to mankind, * was led as a sheep to the
slaughter; * the princes of Hades trembled before Him * and the gates of
lamentations were lifted up; * for Christ the King of glory entered therein, *
saying to those in bondage: 'Come forth!' ** and to those in darkness: 'Reveal
yourselves!'
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear
my voice.
O great wonder! * Having suffered in the flesh through his love for mankind, *
the Creator of all things visible and invisible, * hath arisen as immortal. * Come O
ye descendents of the nations, * let us worship Him; * for delivered from
deception by his compassion, ** we have learned to hymn one God in three
Hypostases.
Other Stichera, by Anatolius:
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication.
We offer unto Thee our evening worship, * O never-setting Light, * who in
the flesh at the end of the ages, * as in a mirror, shone through upon the world, *
and descended even into Hades, * dispersing the darkness therein * and showing
unto the nations the light of the Resurrection. ** O Lord, Giver of light, glory be
to Thee!
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness.
Let us glorify Christ the author of our salvation; * for by his arising from the
dead, * the world hath been saved from delusion; * the choir of Angels rejoiceth, *
the deception of demons fleeth, * fallen Adam hath arisen, ** and the devil hath
been overthrown.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my
soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
The watchmen were instructed by the lawless Ones * to conceal Christ's
Resurrection, * taking money to say that 'while we slept * the corpse was stolen
from the grave.' * Who ever saw, or who ever heard of a corpse being stolen? *
Especially one anointed yet naked, * and with its grave-clothes left in the tomb? *
Be not deceived, O ye Jews, * learn from the sayings of the Prophets, * and know
that He is truly the Redeemer of the world ** and All-powerful.
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
O Lord, our Savior, * Thou hast despoiled Hades and trampled upon death; *
enlightening the world by the precious Cross, ** have mercy upon us.
Then the Stichera from the Menaion, with the following Verses:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
Glory from the Menaion, if appointed. Otherwise:
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion Dogmatic:
In the Red Sea of old * an image of the Bride who knew not wedlock was
depicted. * There Moses was the one who parted the sea, * here Gabriel is the
minister of the miracle. * At that time Israel marched dry-shod through the deep,
* now the Virgin doth seedlessly give birth to Christ. * The sea after Israel's
passage remained impassable; * the Immaculate one after bearing Emmanuel
remained incorrupt. * O God, who doth exist and is pre-eternal, * and hath
appeared as man, ** have mercy upon us.
After the Entrance and “O Joyous Light ...”,
Saturday Vespers Prokeimenon, in Tone VI:
The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty.
Verse: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself.
Verse: For He established the universe which shall not be shaken.
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V:
With voices of song we magnify Thee, O Christ, * the Savior incarnate, * yet
not separated from heaven, * for as the Lord who lovest mankind * Thou hast
suffered the cross and death for the sake of our race, * overthrowing the gates of
Hades, * and rising on the third day, ** thus saving our souls.
Verse: The Lord is King: He hath clothed Himself in majesty. * The Lord
hath clothed and girded Himself with power.
When Thy side was pierced, O Giver of life, * Thou didst pour forth streams
of forgiveness, * of life and salvation for all; * Thou didst suffer death in the flesh,
* granting unto us immortality, * and by dwelling in a grave Thou hast freed us, *
gloriously raising us up with Thyself as God; * wherefore we cry out to Thee: **
'O Lord, Lover of mankind, glory be to Thee!'
Verse: He hath made the universe firm; * which shall not be shaken.
Wonderful is Thy crucifixion * and Thy descent into Hades, O Lover of
mankind, * for having despoiled it and as God gloriously raising with Thyself *
those who were captive therein, * Thou hast opened Paradise and bidden them
welcome. * So too grant unto us who glorify Thine Arising on the third day, * the
forgiveness of our sins, * making us worthy to be inhabitants of Paradise, ** as
Thou alone art compassionate.
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, * O Lord, unto length of days.
O Lover of mankind, * who for our sake didst accept to suffer the passion in
the flesh, * and arise from the dead on the third day, * heal the passions of our
flesh, * and raise us up from our grievous transgressions, ** and save us.
Glory from the Menaion, if appointed, otherwise:
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
Thou art the temple and portal, * the palace and throne of the King, * O most
honored Virgin, * through whom Christ the Lord, my Redeemer, * Who is the
Sun of righteousness, * hath revealed Himself unto those who sleep in darkness, *
deigning to enlighten those * whom He hath fashioned in His image by His own
hand. * Wherefore, O all-hymned one, * as thou hast acquired a mother’s
boldness before Him, ** entreat Him without ceasing, that our souls be saved.
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion. Then:
Then, in Tone IV:
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, *
for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice)
Note: If it is a regular Sunday Vigil, we chant “O Theotokos and Virgin ...”
(Thrice). If it is one of the 12 great feasts, we chant the Troparion of the feast
(Thrice). If it is a Sunday coinciding with some other feast, we chant “O
Theotokos and Virgin ...”, (Twice), and the Troparion of the Feast (Once).
And the Dismissal.
If a Vigil is not served, we chant (Once):
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone V:
Let us, O faithful, praise and worship the Word * Who is co-beginningless
with the Father and the Spirit, * and Who was born of the Virgin for our
salvation; * for He was pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh * and to endure
death, ** and to raise the dead by His glorious Resurrection.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., the Resurrection Theotokion, in Tone V:
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of
those who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * and
who knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * Cease
not to intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring.
SATURDAY NIGHT:
COMPLINE
The priest saith: Blessed is our God..., and we respond: Amen. Glory to Thee,
our God, glory to Thee. О heavenly King..., Trisagion through Our Father. Lord,
have mercy (12 times). Glory ..., Now & ever... О come, let us worship... (Thrice).
Psalm 50 (Have mercy on me, О God...); Psalm 69 (O God, be attentive unto
helping me...); and Psalm 142 (О Lord, hear my prayer...). Then, Glory to God in
the highest..., and the Symbol of Faith (I believe in one God...).
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos, in Tone V
ODE I
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they
chanted a song of victory.
We are all at a loss how to offer thee fitting hymnody, О Lady; for thy glory
surpasseth all. Yet, О Bride of God, disdain not the entreaty offered to thee with
fear and love.
We all have recourse to the water of thine inexhaustible wellspring, О Virgin
Theotokos, crying out: О most pure one, thou sole joy of our race, ask peace for
thy Churches.
Glory ..., God Who was well-pleased to receive flesh from thee hath appointed
thee as a haven for all amid misfortunes, О pure one; wherefore, falling down
before thee, we cry aloud: Grant thine aid unto thy servants!
Now & ever ..., Let thy prayer, О most pure Virgin, be for thy servants the
dispelling of the passions, the eradication of sins and the washing away of all
manner of pain, О Birthgiver of God.
ODE III
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing *
and suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * who alone art good *
and the Lover of mankind.
Thou art the hope of mortals, their help and joy, protection and refuge, О
Lady, Mother of Life; wherefore, we pray thee: Send down thy help upon all who
hymn thee, О most pure one.
О compassionate Author, God and Savior of all, we who are infirm and are
beset by grievous perils set Thy Mother before Thee as a most pure tabernacle, to
supplicate Thee. Loose Thou the bonds of our transgressions.
Glory ..., О Bride of God, who alone hast given birth to the Creator,
Fashioner and Lord of all while remaining a virgin, grant salvation from on high
to thy servants who glorify thee as truly the Mother of God.
Now & ever ..., Fill me with life-creating waters, О Lady who hast poured
forth the divine Water upon the world; and with thy divine tranquility still thou
the cruel torrents of mine iniquities and the tumult of my heart.
ODE IV
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying,
O Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the
salvation of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed Ones.
In that thou art more exalted than all creation, О all-hymned Theotokos, God
hath given thee to those on earth as a source of mediation before Him.
Knowing thee to be the temple of God, О Virgin Mother, we who honor thee
earnestly pray: Shut not the portals of thy mercy against thy servants, О
Theotokos!
Glory ..., Knowing thee to be the true raiment of God all-adorned, О Mother
who knewest not wedlock, we who honor thee all pray: Array us in the vesture of
remission!
Now & ever ..., The whole world was filled with joy at thy nativity, О most
pure one; wherefore, the great Gabriel announced to thee: Rejoice, О Virgin
Mother Mary!
ODE V
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O
Christ, * in that Thou alone art compassionate!
Truly we are not chastened according to the measure of our offenses! О most
pure Virgin Mother, turn away from us all the wrath of thy Son!
О pure one who hast given birth, without knowing wedlock, to God Who
alone brought forth light out of darkness, earnestly beseech Him, that He send
down divine light upon thy servants.
Glory ..., With the incense of thy prayers, О pure Mother of the Creator,
whom Solomon foretold as the divine bride out of Lebanon, spread fragrance
upon thy servants.
Now & ever ..., Having given birth without seed to Christ, our justification
and deliverance, О Theotokos, thou hast rendered the nature of our first parents
free of the curse.
ODE VI
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its
soul-destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou
art compassionate.
О Lady Theotokos who hast given birth to the Creator, ask remission for thy
servants, and raise us up in might, that we may hymn thee.
Be thou a help to us thy servants who entreat thee with faith, О pure Lady, in
that thou art merciful, and raise us up in might, that we may hymn thee.
Glory ..., As thou hast the power to do what thou desirest, as is meet, О pure
Lady, look upon thy servants with a merciful eye, and raise us up from corruption.
Now & ever ..., Unceasingly pouring forth streams of compassion upon those
who ask, О most immaculate and good one, rain down upon me also the light of
thy Son’s commandments.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone V:
О all-holy Virgin, have mercy upon us who have recourse to thy tender
compassion with faith, and who ask thy fervent aid; for thou art able to save us all,
in that thou art the good Mother of God Most High, ever embracing Him with
thy maternal supplications, О divinely joyous Virgin.
ODE VII
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, *
and bedewed the Youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed
art Thou!
О Christ, Thou unfathomable Wisdom of God, have pity upon Thy servants,
for the sake of her who gave birth to Thee, for we unceasingly chant: Blessed art
Thou, О God!
О Lord, we entreat Thy goodness: heal Thou our wounds, for the sake of her
who gave birth to Thee, for we chant with fear: Blessed art Thou, О God!
Glory ..., With thy merciful eye, О Mother of God, look down and deliver thy
servants from every evil circumstance, for we chant with faith: Blessed art Thou,
О God!
Now & ever ..., Committing evil deeds, we have fallen away from thee, О
Lady; yet have we straightway found thy help, О most pure one, when we have
cried: Blessed art Thou, О God!
ODE VIII
Irmos: The Son of God who before all ages * wast born of the Father * hath
in these last times * become incarnate of the Virgin-Mother, * O ye priests
hymn, * and ye peoples supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.
О our Lady, bestower of good things: grant the healing of the passions unto
thy servants, О Virgin, that we may unceasingly hymn and supremely exalt thee
throughout the ages.
О pure one who hast given birth indescribably to the Redeemer, thou didst
ineffably give suck to Him while remaining a virgin. Him do thou entreat on
behalf of those who hymn and glorify thee throughout all ages.
Glory ..., Forming ourselves into a most beautiful choir, we sing to thee, the
radiant lamp of the Redeemer: О all ye works of the Lord, unceasingly hymn the
Virgin Mary, and supremely exalt her throughout the ages!
Now & ever ..., О pure ewe-lamb, Virgin Maiden and Mother, cleanse me of
the carnal passions, that I may be delivered from the snares of the deceiver,
chanting hymns to thee, О divinely joyous one.
ODE IX
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and man; *
and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed.
Our hymnody is completed, О Christ Master, but our hope in Thee, our
Creator, like Thy grace, knoweth no limitation. Wherefore, grant mighty power to
Thy servants, both monastic and the laity, through the supplications of her who
gave birth to Thee.
As thou art the true Mother of Life, О pure one, thou art the strength of the
sick and infirm; wherefore, fleeing unto thee, О Lady, we have found the
remission of all sorrows and have been saved by thy protection.
Glory ..., Beholding thy divine countenance in thine images, О Lady, we
perceive thee clearly therein, in all ways hating the mindlessness of heretics on
earth. And falling down before the icons, we receive healing.
Now & ever ..., О pure one, we sinners know thee to be an abyss of healings
and a sea of grace; wherefore, we beseech thee: О most pure one, from all want
rescue us who have recourse to thy protection.
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and the rest as usual. Dismissal.
SUNDAY MORNING
AT NOCTURNS
The priest saith: “Blessed is our God ...”, and we say: Amen. Glory to Thee,
our God, glory to Thee. О heavenly King... Trisagion through Our Father... Priest:
For Thine is the kingdom ..., And we say: Amen. Lord, have mercy (12 times),
Glory..., Now & ever..., О come, let us worship (Thrice). Psalm 50 (Have mercy
on me, О God...)
And then, the Canon to the Holy & Life-creating Trinity, the acrostic whereof
is “The fifth rule to the three-Sunned light”, the composition of Metrophanes, in
Tone V:
ODE I
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they
chanted a song of victory.
Refrain: О most holy Trinity, our God, glory be to Thee!
Hymning the might of the single countenance of the triple Sun, we cry out:
Illumine our mind, О almighty God, and raise it up to Thine ineffable glory, О
Master!
On high the noetic rings of the angels with thrice-holy voices continually
hymn the threefold Unity, the Trinity sharing the same essence, transcendent and
omnipotent.
Glory ..., Give unto my soul the divine, most sweet and light-giving food of
Thy love and divine and cleansing compunction, О Trinity, Unity, Origin of light,
greatly merciful Master of all creation
Now & ever ..., Theotokion: Without thunder, like the dew upon the fleece,
the divine Rain descended from heaven into thy womb, О Virgin; and He hath
saved all human nature, which had dried up, О all-pure one.
ODE III
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing *
and suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * who alone art good *
and the Lover of mankind.
Having conceived in thought the noetic beings, Thou didst make them
constant singers of Thy divinity, О thrice-radiant and almighty God. Yet, as Thou
art compassionate, accept also the entreaty and supplication of mortals made of
clay.
As Thou art compassionate, О Thou Who by essence art immune to change,
grant forgiveness offenses and salvation unto us who are changeable, and hymn
the unfathomable well-spring of Thy goodness.
Glory ..., As the prophets and the apostles manifestly learned from Thee, we
glorify Thee - the Father, the Son and the Spirit - in the immutable aspect of the
one and thrice-radiant Godhead of the Lord of all.
Now & ever ..., Theotokion: Thou didst appear unto Moses in the bush as the
Angel of great Counsel of the Almighty, revealing Thine incarnation from the
Virgin, О Word of God, whereby Thou hast transformed us and raised us up to
the heavens.
Lord, have mercy! (Thrice)
Sessional hymn, in Tone V:
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”:
Merciful art Thou, О indivisible Trinity, for Thou hast mercy on all, in that
Thou art almighty and most compassionate, full of pity and greatly merciful.
Wherefore, we who are weighed down with many sins flee unto Thee, crying
aloud: Cleanse Thou Thy servants, and deliver all from every torment!
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
О all-holy Virgin, have mercy on us who with faith have recourse to thee, the
compassionate one, and now ask thy fervent aid; for as thou art good, thou art
able to save us, in that thou art the Mother of God Most High, ever employing
thy maternal supplications, О thou who art full of the grace of God.
ODE IV
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying,
O Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the
salvation of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed Ones.
Beholding Christ the Judge going to the Father and revealing a vision of the
Spirit, Daniel mystically learned of the threefold radiance of the one Dominion.
Grant the glory of the angels unto those who with lips of clay hymn Thee, the
transcendent God, the Trinity of Hypostases, One in Essence.
Glory ..., Let us glorify the one Authority, the one Dominion indivisible in
three characters. О Father, Son and Spirit, enlighten us, Thy servants!
Now & ever ..., Theotokion: The mountain densely wooded and
overshadowed, which Habbakuk beheld of old, and from whence the Holy One
came forth, revealed the invisible Offspring Whom thou didst conceive, О Virgin.
ODE V
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O
Christ, * in that Thou alone art compassionate!
О my God, Thou threefold Light, Who in Thy goodness fashioned man and
made him according to Thine image, abide in me, in that Thou art good and
compassionate.
О three-Sunned Unity, guide me to the divine paths of salvation, and fill me
with Thine effulgence, in that Thou art in essence God infinite in power.
Glory ..., О indivisible Light of the one Essence, thrice-radiant, never-waning,
distinguished in characteristics: with Thy rays illumine my heart.
Now & ever ..., Theotokion: When the prophet of old beheld thee, О most
immaculate and pure one, as the gate facing the never-waning Light, he
straightway recognized thee as the dwelling-place of God.
ODE VI
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its
soul-destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou
art compassionate.
As the thrice-radiant Godhead of Hypostases, Thou art One, sharing the same
form and equal in activity, essence and will.
The prophet clearly revealed Thee when he chanted to the Father, Thy Light:
In the Spirit shall we behold the light of the Son, the one three-Sunned God.
Glory ..., The immaterial Being in three Hypostases hath sole authority and
might; for through It every creature doth receive its existence and is renewed.
Now & ever ..., Through the supplications of the Mother of God, О God, our
sole, thrice-radiant Master, send down deliverance from transgressions and
misfortunes upon those who hymn Thee.
Lord, have mercy! (Thrice)
Sessional hymn, in Tone V:
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”:
Let us now glorify the three-Sunned Light, and let us worship the simple
Trinity, for It hath enlightened and had mercy upon us, and hath freed from
corruption the whole race of mankind, delivering the whole world from the deceit
of idolatry, and hath given us the kingdom.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Perplexed by all things, I have fled to thee, the help of all and refuge of the
sinful and lowly, crying aloud: I have sinned and insensibly abide in evils, wretch
that I am! Have mercy on me and, before the end, turn me back, and deliver me
from all torment, unworthy though I be.
ODE VII
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, *
and bedewed the Youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed
art Thou!
As Thou dost possess an abyss of mercy and an unfathomable depth of
compassions, О Lord, have mercy upon those who hymn Thee, the one, thriceradiant God of all.
Hymning Thee, the incomprehensible, single and thrice-radiant God and
Lord, we cry out to Thee: Grant cleansing of sins unto Thy servants.
Glory ..., Equally honoring the Hypostases in the single Dominion, we
distinguish the indivisible Essence of God the Father, and the Son, and the most
holy Spirit.
Now & ever ..., Theotokion: Thou didst bud forth the Flower of the Godhead,
the Offshoot of the beginningless Father, О Virgin, the co-eternal Scion which
imparteth life to all mankind.
ODE VIII
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace
chanted a hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him
throughout all ages.
That Thou mightest reveal One of the three Hypostases of the Dominion, of
old Thou didst manifestly appear unto Abraham in the guise of a man; and he
hymned Thy sole might.
О unapproachable Light - compassionate Father, Word and Spirit - grant that
I may behold Thy beneficent radiance, and may ever be well-pleasing unto Thee,
О Lord of all.
Glory ..., Holy is God the pre-eternal Father; holy is the Son Who is begotten
of the Father; and holy is the life-creating Spirit, Who proceedeth from the Father
and is revealed by the Son.
Now & ever ..., Theotokion: О all-hymned one, from the glory of the
threefold Sun thou hast shone forth for us the one Christ and Lord, Who
mystically teaches all to chant unto the one Godhead in three Hypostases
throughout all ages.
ODE IX
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and man; *
and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed.
Human words are unable to hymn Thee as is meet, О beginningless Unity; yet
deriving boldness from our faith, as far as possible we offer glory and praise to
Thy might, О divine co-enthroned Trinity.
With most pure mouths the cherubim and seraphim glorify Thee, the one
thrice-radiant God Who dost reign in equal glory; and with them accept also us
sinners, who magnify Thy might.
Glory ..., Isaiah beheld Thee on the throne of the cherubim, with the seraphim
standing round about Thee, covering their faces with their wings, and crying
aloud: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou, О thrice-holy God, Who art glorified in three
Hypostases!
Now & ever ..., Theotokion: In that thou art the pure and immaculate Virgin,
thou hast given birth to the Son, the immutable God Who delivereth us from
temptations. Him do thou now entreat, that He grant us remission of sins.
Then, the hymn of Gregory the Sinaite:
(which, is chanted every Sunday after the canon)
It is truly meet to glorify Thee, the Word of God, before Whom the cherubim
tremble and quake, and Whom the hosts of heaven glorify. And with fear we
glorify Christ, the Bestower of life, Who rose from the tomb on the third day.
With divine songs let us all in godly manner hymn the Father, the Son and the
Spirit divine, the Might in three Hypostases, the one Sovereignty and Dominion,
Whom all mortals hymn and the hosts of heaven glorify, the essential Unity in
three Hypostases, Who is worshipped with faith by all.
We magnify Thee, the Godhead, the Lord of the cherubim, the incomparable
divine Origin of the seraphim, the indivisible Trinity in Unity.
I worship God: the beginningless Father, the Son Who is equally without
beginning, and the Spirit. With hymns let us honor the one indivisible and unified
Essence, the threefold Unity.
Shine forth Thy dazzling lightning flashes upon me, О my God in three
Hypostases, Creator of all, and show me to be a splendid, luminous and
unshakable habitation of Thine unapproachable glory.
With fear let us glorify Christ the Bestower of life, Who ineffably became
incarnate from the Virgin, for the cherubim tremble and quake before Him, and
the angelic armies glorify Him.
The rest of Nocturnes, and the dismissal.
AT MATINS
On “God is The Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, in Tone V:
Let us, O faithful, praise and worship the Word * Who is co-beginningless
with the Father and the Spirit, * and Who was born of the Virgin for our
salvation; * for He was pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh * and to endure
death, ** and to raise the dead by His glorious Resurrection. (Twice)
Glory ..., the Troparion from the Menaion, otherwise Glory ..., Now & Ever ...,
The Theotokion, in Tone V, (or in the Tone of that from the Menaion):
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of
those who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * and
who knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * Cease
not to intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring.
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma II), the Sessional hymns of the
Resurrection, in Tone V:
Let us celebrate the Cross of the Lord, * let us honor His holy Burial with
hymns, * and let us exulting, glorify His Resurrection. * For with Himself He hath
raised the dead from their graves, * and as God having despoiled the dominion of
death * and the might of the devil, ** He hath shone forth light upon those in
Hades.
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted on high; * forget not
Thy paupers to the end.
O Lord, Thou who hast put death to death, * was called dead; * Thou who
hast emptied the tombs was placed in a tomb; * above, the soldiers stood guarding
the grave, * below, Thou didst raise the dead from all ages. * O Lord, Allpowerful and Incomprehensible, ** glory be to Thee!
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
Rejoice holy mountain upon which God hath walked; * Rejoice! living bush
unconsumed by fire; * Rejoice! O only bridge of creation to God, * who leadeth
mortals to eternal life; * Rejoice! Maiden undefiled, * who hath born without
wedlock the salvation of our souls.
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma III), the Sessional hymns of the
Resurrection, in Tone V:
O Lord, after Thy Resurrection on the third day, * and after the worship of the
Apostles, Peter cried unto Thee; * 'The women had courage, and I was afraid; *
the Thief confessed Thee as God, and I denied Thee: * wilt Thou no longer call
me a disciple, * or wilt Thou once again declare me a fisher of the deep? **
Receive me in my penitence, O God, and save me!'
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all
Thy wonders.
O Merciful Lord, the lawless Ones * nailed Thee between two condemned
thieves * and pierced Thy side with a lance, * but Thou, who didst destroy the
gates of Hades, * didst suffer burial and arise on the third day; * The women ran
to see Thee * and announced the Resurrection to Thine Apostles. * O supremely
exalted Savior whom the Angels hymn, ** O blessed Lord, glory be to Thee.
Glory ..., Now & Ever ..., Theotokion:
The Bride who knew not wedlock, the Birthgiver of God, * who turned Eve’s
grief to joy, * do we the faithful hymn and worship, * for thou hast redeemed us
from the ancient curse. * And now, O All-hymned most holy one, ** cease not to
make intercession for the salvation of our souls.
If a POLYELEOS is appointed, we chant: (Select verses):
Verse: Praise ye the name of the Lord; O ye servants, * praise the Lord.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
Verse: Blessed is the Lord out of Zion, * who dwelleth in Jerusalem.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good; * for His mercy
endureth forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
Verse: O give thanks unto the God of Heaven; * for His mercy endureth
forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
(On the Sunday of the Prodigal Son, Meat-Fare, and Cheese-Fare Sundays,
after the Polyeleos we chant Psalm 136: “By the rivers of Babylon…")
Then, the Megalynarion of the feast is chanted, if there is one, with the
selected psalm verse. However, if it is a Sunday, in general parish practice the
Megalynarion is chanted only once, without the psalm verse, unless it is a Great
feast of the Lord, or the Theotokos.
The Resurrectional Verses (THE EVLOGITARIA)
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
The assembly of angels was amazed, * beholding Thee numbered among the
dead; * yet, O Savior, * destroying the stronghold of death, * and with Thyself
raising up Adam, ** Thou hast freed all from Hades.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
Why mingle ye myrrh with tears of pity, * O ye women disciples? * Thus said
the radiant angel within the tomb * addressing the myrrh-bearing women; *
behold the tomb and understand, ** for the Savior hath arisen from the tomb.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
Very early * the myrrh-bearing women hastened * unto Thy tomb, lamenting,
* but the angel stood before them and said: * the time for lamentation is passed,
weep not, ** but tell the apostles of the Resurrection.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes.
The myrrh-bearing women, * with myrrh came to Thy tomb, O Savior,
bewailing, * but the angel addressed them, saying: * Why number ye the living
among the dead, * for as God ** He is risen from the tomb.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
Let us worship the Father, * and His Son, and the Holy Spirit, * the Holy
Trinity, * one in essence, * crying with the Seraphim: ** Holy, Holy, Holy art
Thou, O Lord.
Both Now & ever ..., and unto the ages of ages, Amen..
In bringing forth the Giver of life, * thou hast delivered Adam from sin, O
Virgin, * and hast brought joy to Eve * instead of sorrow; * and those fallen from
life * have thereunto been restored, ** by Him Who of thee was incarnate, God
and man.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice).
Then the little Litany and:
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:
The Myrrh-bearing women, amazed in their minds by the vision of the Angel *
yet enlightened in their souls by the divine Resurrection, * announced the glad
tidings to the Apostles: * 'Proclaim ye among the nations the Resurrection of the
Lord, * Who worketh in us through wonders, ** and Who granteth us great
mercy.
The Songs of Ascent: 1st Antiphon:
When I am troubled I sing to Thee like David, * O my Savior: ** Deliver my
soul from a deceitful tongue.
Blessed is the life of those * who dwell in the desert places, ** Divine love
giveth them wings.
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
By the Holy Spirit all things are unshaken, * both visible and invisible; * for
He hath sovereign power, ** being undeniably one of the Trinity.
2nd Antiphon:
Lift up thyself to the mountains, * O my soul; ** go thither from whence
cometh our help.
Let Thy right hand hover over me, * O Christ, ** and guard me from every
misfortune.
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
Let us sing to the Holy Spirit, * as we contemplate God: * Thou art God, life,
love, light, and intellect, * Thou art goodness, ** and Thou reignest unto the ages.
3rd Antiphon:
Filled with great joy * at the words of those who say unto me: * 'Let us go
into the courts of the Lord', ** I offer up my prayers.
Fearful things are accomplished in the house of David; * for a fire is found
there, ** burning every shameful thought.
Glory ..., Now & ever ...,
To the Holy Spirit belongeth the lordship of life, * for from Him every living
being hath its breath, * as also from the Father ** together with the Son.
Prokeimenon, in Tone V: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hand be lifted
high; * for Thou art king unto the ages.
The Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, I will tell of
all Thy wonders.
Let every breath ...,
The Sunday Resurrection Gospel. Then:
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord
Jesus, * the only sinless One. * We venerate Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy holy
Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we know none
other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye faithful, * let us
worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the Cross joy hath
come to all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His Resurrection; *
for, having endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by death.
Psalm 50, Then:
Glory ..., in Tone VI:
Through the prayers of the Apostles * O Merciful One, ** blot out the
multitude of our transgressions.
Now & ever ..., in Tone VI:
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the
multitude of our transgressions.
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according
to the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions.
Jesus having risen from the grave, * as He foretold, * hath given us life eternal,
** and great mercy.
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...”, Then the Canons:
Resurrection Canon Tone V.
ODE I
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they
chanted a song of victory.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
O Benefactor Christ, the Assembly of the Jews showed no beneficent love for
Thee, but bearing thorns they crowned Thee, the Author of our race, who hath
abolished the punishment of tares.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
O Giver of life, without falling Thou, O Sinless One, didst descend into the pit
and raise me up who had fallen. Thou didst endure the stench of my corruption
unsullied, and hath made me sweet-smelling with the myrrh of Thy divine nature.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: The curse hath been abolished, and sorrow hath ceased, for the
Blessed One, full of Grace, hath made joy dawn upon the faithful, bringing forth a
flower, Christ, as a blessing unto all the ends of the earth.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Unto Him who hath been willingly nailed upon the Cross, and through the
Cross freed the fallen one from the ancient curse, to Him alone let us sing, for He
is glorified.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Unto Christ, the Dead One, who hath risen from the tomb and raised together
with Himself the fallen one and adorned him by seating him with the Father, to
Him alone let us sing, for He is glorified.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: O Immaculate Mother of God, we beseech thee to unceasingly
implore God who was incarnate from thee, yet never absent from His Father’s
bosom, to save those whom He hath fashioned from every besetting calamity.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O all-immaculate One, implore Christ, the light who dwelt within thee and
Who hath enlightened the world with the rays of His Godhead, to enlighten all
those who hymn thee, O Virgin Theotokos.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O thou who art Full of grace, and art made fair by the beauty of the virtues,
thou hast received by the overshadowing of the Spirit the comeliness that
bestoweth beauty, O most pure one, and which maketh the universe radiant.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O Virgin, the bush on Sinai foreshadowing thee of old, was not consumed
though mingled with fire; for beyond understanding as a Virgin thou didst bear a
child and yet remain a Virgin, O Virgin Mother.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE III
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing *
and suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * who alone art good *
and the Lover of mankind.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Unto Thee O Christ, Who didst work the wondrous miracle in the wilderness,
did the ungrateful children of Israel, who had suckled honey from the rocks, offer
gall, and in exchange for Thy deeds of goodness they offered Thee vinegar instead
of manna.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
They who of old were protected by a cloud of light, laid Christ, who is life, in a
tomb; but by Thine own power Thou didst arise and grant unto all the faithful the
effulgence of the Spirit, which doth mystically overshadow them from above.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Without wedlock and without the pain of childbirth thou hast
become the Mother of Him Who shone forth from the incorrupt Father through
thee; Since thou didst bear the Word made flesh, with Orthodox belief we
proclaim thee to be the Theotokos.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Thou hast arisen from the tomb, O Christ, giver of life, delivering from the
corruption of death those who hymn Thy voluntary crucifixion.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
The Myrrh-bearing women were hastening to anoint Thy body, O Christ, and
not finding it they returned hymning Thine Arising.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: O pure one, without ceasing implore the one who became
incarnate from thy loins that those who hymn thee, O pure Virgin, may be
delivered from the snares of the devil.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Thou hast now most clearly been revealed, O honored Virgin, to be the ladder
by which the Most High came down to restore corrupted nature. For through thee
the supremely good One was well-pleased to be joined to the world.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
God, Who of old prefigured the mystery of the Virgin, and Who knoweth all
things, even from before the ages, hath in these last days sent His offspring and
revealed Him taking His dwelling within thy womb, O all-immaculate one.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The condemnation of the ancient curse hath been absolved through thee, O
most pure Virgin, for in His exceeding goodness the Lord, having come forth
from thee, hath poured forth His blessings upon all, O praise-worthy One.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
The small litany:
ODE IV
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying,
O Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the
salvation of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed Ones.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
O Good One, Through wood Thou didst sweeten the bitter waters of Mara as
if in an icon prefiguring Thine immaculate Cross, the wood which doth rectify the
bitter taste of sin.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Thou didst accept, O my Savior, a Cross in place of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, and gall for sweet provender; while for the corruption of death
Thou didst shed Thy divine blood.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Without wedlock and without corruption didst thou conceive in
thy womb, and in giving birth without the pangs of labor, thou didst bare God in
the flesh, and after giving birth remained a Virgin.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
When the Cross was fixed upon the earth on Golgotha, the bars of Hades
were smashed and the eternal gate-keepers cried aloud: 'Glory to Thy power, O
Lord!'
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
When the Savior descended to the those in bonds as one dead, the dead from
all ages arose with Him and cried aloud: 'Glory to Thy power, O Lord!'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: The Virgin hath given birth without knowing the birth-pangs of a
mother, but a mother hath she been shown to be and a virgin hath she remained;
wherefore hymning her we cry: 'Rejoice!, O Theotokos!'
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Devoutly confessing thee with heart, mind, soul and voice, as truly the
Theotokos, O pure Virgin, I thereby gather the fruit of salvation and am saved by
thine intercessions.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
He that created the universe from nothing, hath been well-pleased as a
Benefactor to be fashioned from thee, O pure One. for the salvation of those who
with faith and love hymn thee, O all-immaculate One.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The choirs beyond this world hymn thine offspring, O all-immaculate One,
rejoicing at the salvation of those who believe thee to be the true Theotokos, O
Virgin undefiled.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Isaiah named thee the staff from which, for our sakes, hath sprung forth a fair
flower, Christ God, for the salvation of those who with faith and love have
recourse unto thy protection.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE V
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O
Christ, * in that Thou alone art compassionate!
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
The Lord of glory in a form without glory, hath been voluntarily hung
dishonored upon the tree, and thus hath ineffably procured for me divine glory.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Thou, O Christ, hast clothed me with incorruption, having incorruptibly tasted
the corruption of death in the flesh, and didst dawn forth from the grave on the
third day.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Having given birth without seed to Christ, who is our justice and
redemption, O Theotokos, thou hast freed our Forefather’s nature from the curse.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Thine hands outstretched upon the tree, O our Savior, Thou didst call all to
Thyself as Thou art the Lover of mankind.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Thou hast despoiled Hades, O my Savior, and by Thy burial and Thy
Resurrection, Thou hast filled all things with joy.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Having arisen from tomb on the third day, Thou hast rendered all immortal
and incorrupt.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: We sing thy praises as a Virgin after child-birth, O Theotokos;
for thou hast borne unto all the world, God the Word in the flesh.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
All the Prophets clearly announced thee beforehand, O All-Honored
Theotokos; for thou alone, O pure one, wast found to be wholly immaculate.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O Most pure one, we acknowledge thee to be the illumined cloud of living
water which hath rained down upon us, thy despairing people, Christ the shower
of incorruption.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
God, who alone is compassionate dwelt within thee, and loved thee as one
close to Him. O thou wholly good and immaculate One, sealing thy purity with
virginity.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE VI
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its
soul-destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou
art compassionate.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
The Ancestor of mankind, O Master Christ, descended into corruption
through tasting of the forbidden fruit, but was restored to life through Thy
Passion.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Thou, who art Life, didst descend into Hades, O Master Christ, and by
becoming corruption to the corrupter, through death Thou hast became the
source of the Resurrection.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: The Virgin hath given birth to a child and after child-birth
remained pure, and as a truly Virgin Mother, cradled Him who holdeth all things
in His hands.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Thou hast stretched out Thy hands, gathering together the nations, separated
far from Thee, O Christ our God, by Thy life-bearing Cross, for Thou art the
Lover of mankind.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Thou hast despoiled death and shattered the gates of Hades; while Adam,
released from his chains, crieth out to Thee: 'Thy right hand hath saved me, O
Lord!'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: O Mary, thou praise of the Orthodox, we fittingly glorify thee as
the bush that remained un-burnt, the mountain and the living ladder, and the gate
of heaven.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
When He who is the cause of all, by giving existence to all, took flesh like unto
our flesh, He had thee as the cause of this wonder, O all-immaculate Theotokos.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
We know thee, O all-immaculate one, to be a source brimming with life-giving
healing for those who with faith have recourse to thy far-famed protection, O
Sovereign Lady.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
For us Thou didst bring forth the Giver of life, the source of our salvation,
who bestoweth eternal redemption upon those who proclaim thee to be the true
Theotokos.
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
The small litany:
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone V:
Thou didst descend into Hades, O my Savior, * and having shattered its gates,
as All-powerful, * Thou didst raise the dead with Thyself, as Creator, * and didst
deliver Adam from the curse, * O Lover of mankind. ** Therefore, we all cry to
Thee: 'Save us, O Lord!'
Ikos: When The women heard the Angel’s words, they cast away their
lamentation and became radiantly joyful, trembling as they beheld the
Resurrection. Christ drew near to them saying 'Come and see, Rejoice! take
courage, I have overcome the world and set free the prisoners held in the bondage
of Hades. Hurry then to the Disciples, and take unto them this message: Lo, I go
before you to preach in the cities of Galilee.' Wherefore we all cry unto Thee: Save
us, O Lord!
ODE VII
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, *
and bedewed the Youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed
art Thou!
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
Wrapped in flesh, like unto bait draping a hook, Thou didst hurl down the
serpent by Thy divine power raising up those who cry: 'O God, blessed art Thou!'
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
The Uncircumscribed One, who hath brought into being the boundless
creation of the universe, is hidden in the flesh in a tomb. To Him we all sing: 'O
God, blessed art Thou!'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, thou hast borne in one Hypostasis two
natures, God incarnate. To Him we all sing: 'O God, blessed art Thou!'
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Thou hast destroyed the deception of idols through the tree of the Cross; O
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Thou didst arise from the dead, and with Thee, Thou hast raised those in
Hades; O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Thou wast born of a Virgin, and revealed her to be the
Theotokos; O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The Uncircumscribed One, who remaineth unchanged, was, since He is
compassionate, Hypostatically united to flesh within thee the Most holy One. He
Who is The only blessed God of our fathers.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O Sovereign Lady, Theotokos, with one voice we glorify thee, the allimmaculate bride and throne of thy Creator; to Him we all sing: 'Blessed art Thou,
O God.'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Made pure by the Spirit, O Virgin, thou didst become the Mother of the King
of all, who hath fashioned thee; to Him we all sing: 'Blessed art Thou, O God.'
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The Lord saved me, O all-immaculate Theotokos, having clothed Himself in
the garment of the flesh He took from thee; to Him do we all chant: 'Blessed art
Thou, O God.'
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
ODE VIII
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace
chanted a hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him
throughout all ages.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
As if it was not willed by Thee, Thou didst pray that the cup of Thy saving
Passion might pass; revealing thereby that Thou dost bear two wills, O Christ,
corresponding to Thy two natures, throughout the ages.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
At Thy descent, O Christ, Hades became an object of derision disgorging all
those who of old had been slain by the devil’s deception and who now supremely
exalt Thee throughout all ages.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: O Virgin, who beyond all understanding hath, by the Word, given
birth to the Lord as both God and man, and yet remained a virgin, all we His
works bless thee and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Christ God, who willingly stretched forth His hands upon the cross and
thereby hath broken open the bonds of death; praise Him, ye priests, and ye
peoples supremely exalt Him, throughout all ages.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Christ God, who didst dawn from the tomb like a bridegroom, appearing to
the Myrrh-bearing women and proclaiming unto them the tidings of great joy;
praise Him, ye priests, and ye peoples supremely exalt Him, throughout all ages.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed, O pure Theotokos, as higher than the
Cherubim, for within thy womb thou didst carry Him who rideth upon them.
With the Bodiless Powers we mortals glorify Him, throughout all ages.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The grief of the first-parents hath now ceased, since thou, God’s Mother, hast
given birth to joy; wherefore we unceasingly hymn thee, O Virgin, and supremely
exalt thee throughout all ages.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
The hosts of the Bodiless Powers sing the praises of thine incomprehensible
child-bearing with us, O Virgin; With one voice and with love we, with them,
supremely exalt thy child-bearing throughout all ages.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
A translucent stream of immortality hath issued forth from thee, O Maiden,
the Lord of all, who cleanseth away the filth of sin from those who hymn thee
with faith, and who supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
We confess thee, O Virgin, to be in truth, a divine and radiant throne, and a
tabernacle of grace, for thou didst receive the Word of the Father; whom we
supremely exalt throughout all ages.
After the Troparia from the Menaion for ODE VIII, we chant:
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely
exalting Him throughout all ages.
And then the appointed Katavasia:
After which we chant the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (the Magnificat)
Note: on great feasts special Megalynarion are chanted in place of the Magnificat:
Verse: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in
God my Savior.
And after each Verse:
Refrain: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more
glorious than the Seraphim; * who without corruption gavest birth to God the
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; * for
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: For the Mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His
name; * and His mercy is on them that fear Him * unto generation and
generation.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: He hath showed strength with His arm, * and He hath scattered the
proud in the imagination of their heart.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: He hath put down the mighty from their seat, * and exalted them of
low degree; * He hath filled the hungry with good things, * and the rich He
hath sent empty away.
Refrain: More honorable …
Verse: He hath holpen His servant Israel * in remembrance of His mercy,
* as He spake to our fathers, * to Abraham and his seed forever.
Refrain: More honorable …
ODE IX
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and man; *
and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
O Master Christ, Thou hast assumed the nature of fallen mankind, and
become wholly joined to him from a virgin womb, but alone not sharing in sin,
and Thou hast freed the whole of him from corruption by Thine undefiled
passion.
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.
O Master Christ God, by the blood which flowed from Thine immaculate and
life-giving side, sacrifice to idols hath ceased, and all the earth doth offer Thee the
sacrifice of praise.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: The pure and holy Maiden did not reveal God without a body,
nor yet a mere man, but both a perfect man and in truth perfect God, Whom we
magnify together with the Father and the Spirit.
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Thou didst endure sufferings on the Cross and by Thy death Thou didst
destroy the power of Hades; with Orthodox belief we the faithful magnify Thee.
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord.
Thou didst arise from the tomb on the third day, despoiling Hades and
enlightening the world; we the faithful with one mind magnify Thee.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Theotokion: Rejoice!, O God-bearer, Mother of Christ God; beseech Him
Whom thou didst bear to grant remission of sins unto those who hymn thee with
faith.
Another, of the Theotokos:
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
O Ever-virgin Theotokos, from thy pure blood the flesh of the Creator and
only-begotten Son of the Father was nurtured in a manner beyond nature, not
from a man, and without seed, yet possessing both a mind and a soul.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Thou didst halt the unrestrained stream of death, when beyond telling, thou
didst in truth give birth in the flesh to life eternal; for Hades, consuming it with its
bitter mouth, hath been destroyed.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Seated on His royal throne as Lord, thy Son hath placed thee on His right
hand, shining radiantly in tasseled gold, and in divine virtues, bestowing upon thee
the honor due His Mother, O all-immaculate One.
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.
Thy childbirth is beyond telling, O Mother of God, for without a man hast
thou conceived, and in a virginal manner hast thou delivered God; wherefore
magnifying Him, we glorify thee, O Theotokos
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia.
The small litany:
Then, “Holy is our God ...”: (Thrice)
Exapostilarion (Svetilen).
Note: The Exapostilarion is taken from the prescribed Eothinon according to
the Resurrection Gospel, however, If the Menaion service is ‘feasted’ the
Exapostilarion, with the appointed Theotokion, are taken from the Menaion.
On the Aposticha: “Let every breath ...”, 8 Stichera of the Resurrection,
however, if the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ sing the first 4 Stichera from
the Resurrection, and the last 4 from the Menaion, with the appointed verses.
On the Aposticha, the Resurrection Stichera, in Tone V:
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written * This glory shall be
to all His saints.
O Lord, while the grave was sealed by lawless men, * Thou didst come forth
from the tomb * in a manner similar to Thy birth from the Theotokos. * Thy
bodiless Angels could not fathom the event of Thine incarnation, * likewise the
soldiers guarding Thee could not know when Thou didst Arise. * For the full
knowledge of both events hath been sealed from those who would inquire, * but
the wonder of these events hath been revealed to those who with faith * worship
the mystery which we hymn; ** grant unto us joy and great mercy.
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His
power.
O Lord, having smashed the eternal bars and burst asunder the bonds of
Hades, * Thou didst arise from the tomb, * leaving Thy grave clothes behind in
testimony of Thy three day burial. * Whereupon Thou didst go forth into Galilee,
* while yet being guarded in a cave. * Great is Thy mercy, O Savior, and beyond
understanding; ** have mercy upon us.
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the
multitude of His greatness.
O Lord, the women ran unto Thy tomb to see Thee, * the Christ who had
suffered for our sakes. * Approaching the tomb they found an Angel seated upon
the stone, which had rolled back from fear, * and he cried unto them saying. *
'The Lord hath arisen; go tell His disciples that He is risen, saving your souls.'
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the
psaltery and harp.
O Lord, in a manner similar to that * by which Thou didst come forth from
the sealed tomb, * Thou didst enter in unto Thy disciples when the doors were
shut, * showing them Thy body’s sufferings, * O long-suffering Savior, * which
Thou didst willingly endure. * As one who hath sprung forth from the seed of
David, * Thou didst endure wounds, * but as One who didst spring forth from
God, * even the Son of God * Thou hast delivered the world. * Incomprehensible
and great is Thy mercy, ** O Savior, have mercy on us.
Other Stichera, by Anatolius:
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and
flute.
O Lord, and King of the ages, * Creator of all things, * Who for our sake
willingly endured crucifixion and burial in the flesh, * in order to free us all from
Hades, * Thou art our God and we know no other besides Thee.
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.
O Lord, who will recount Thine awe-inspiring wonders? * Who will confess
Thy dread mysteries? * For, becoming incarnate for us, as Thou Thyself didst will,
* Thou hast manifest the might of Thy power; * For on Thy Cross Thou didst
open Paradise to the Thief, * and in Thy Burial Thou didst smash the bars of
Hades, * and with Thy Resurrection Thou hast enriched all things. * O
Compassionate Lord, glory be to Thee!
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted high; * forget not
Thy paupers to the end.
The Myrrh-bearing women coming to Thy tomb in the deep of morning *
seeking to anoint with spices the Immortal Word and God; * and being informed
by the words of the Angel * returned with joy to tell the Apostles * that Thou O
Lord, the life of all, hast arisen, ** granting the world forgiveness and great mercy.
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all
Thy wonders.
The guards of the tomb which received God said unto the Jews: * 'O the folly
of your plan! * In vain did ye labor when you thought to guard Him who cannot
be circumscribed'. * 'Openly you appeared wishing to hide the Resurrection of the
Crucified One. * O the folly of your assembly!' * 'Why do ye again wish to hide
that which cannot be hidden?' * 'Rather listen to us, * and be willing to believe the
truth of what hath taken place.' * 'A radiant Angel came down from heaven and
rolled away the stone;' * from fear of Him ye became as dead men,' * and calling
out to the brave Myrrh-bearing women the Angel said: * 'Do ye not see the death
of the guards, * the breaking of the seals and the emptying of Hades?' * 'Why seek
ye as a mortal man, * the one who hath destroyed Hades’ victory * and smashed
death’s sting?' * 'Go quickly and proclaim to the Apostles * the good tidings of the
Resurrection, crying fearlessly:' * 'He hath risen indeed, ** the Lord who hath
great mercy!'
Glory ..., The Eothinon of the Resurrection Gospel
Note: If the service from the Menaion is “feasted” the Eothinon is taken from
the Menaion, and the Eothinon of the Gospel is read at the end of Matins.
Now & Ever ..., Theotokion. In Tone II.
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took
flesh from thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, Eve
set free, * death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in praise
we cry: ** Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-pleased,
glory be to Thee.
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion.
Today is salvation come unto the world; * let us sing praises to Him that arose
from the tomb, * and is the Author of our life. * For, having destroyed death by
death, ** He hath given us the victory and great mercy.
AT THE LITURGY
Typika and Beatitudes.
Believing Thee to be God, O Christ, the thief on the cross confessed Thee in a
pure manner, crying out from the depths of his heart: Remember me in Thy
kingdom, O Lord!
Together let us hymn as Savior and Creator, Him Who on the Cross budded
forth life for our race and caused the curse which originated from the tree to
wither up.
By Thy death hast Thou destroyed the power of death, O Christ, and Thou
didst raise up with Thyself the dead of ages past, who now hymn Thee as our true
God and Savior.
Arriving at Thy tomb, O Christ, the honorable women sought to anoint Thee
with myrrh, O Bestower of life; but an angel appeared to them, crying out: The
Lord is risen!
When Thou wast crucified between two condemned thieves, O Christ, one of
them blasphemed Thee and was justly damned, while the other confessed Thee
and dwelleth now in paradise.
When they had come to the choir of the apostles, the honorable women cried
out: Christ is risen! Let us worship Him as Master and Creator.
O indivisible Trinity, all-effecting and all-powerful Unity: Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit: Thee do we hymn as our true God and Savior!
Theotokion: Rejoice, O animate temple of God and impassible gate! Rejoice,
O fiery throne which burneth yet is not consumed! Rejoice, O Mother of
Emmanuel, Christ our God!
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone V:
Let us, O faithful, praise and worship the Word * Who is co-beginningless
with the Father and the Spirit, * and Who was born of the Virgin for our
salvation; * for He was pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh * and to endure
death, ** and to raise the dead by His glorious Resurrection.
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone V:
Thou didst descend into Hades, O my Savior, * and having shattered its gates,
as All-powerful, * Thou didst raise the dead with Thyself, as Creator, * and didst
deliver Adam from the curse, * O Lover of mankind. ** Therefore, we all cry to
Thee: 'Save us, O Lord!'
The Prokeimenon, in Tone V: Thou, O Lord, shalt keep us and shalt
preserve us from this generation and forevermore.
The Verse: Save me, O Lord, for a righteous man there is no more.
Alleluia, in Tone V: Thy mercies, O Lord, will I sing forever; unto
generation to generation will I declare Thy truth with my mouth.
The Verse: For Thou hast said, Mercy shall be built up forever; in the
heavens shall Thy truth be established.