MONDAY EVENING: TONE V
AT VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 3 Stichera of repentance, in Tone V:
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, Lord, О Lord, who shall stand? *
For with Thee there is forgiveness.
Woe unto me who have angered Thee, my merciful God and Lord! How many
times have I promised to repent, О Christ, and have been found to be a senseless
liar? I have soiled my first baptismal raiment, and have forsaken my covenant with
Thee, and this second commandment, which I confessed before Thee in the
presence of men and angels, have I also abandoned, clad in a lamentable form.
Setting this aside, О Savior, leave me not to perish utterly.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my
soul hath, waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
What answer shalt thou find on the day of judgment, О wretched soul? Who
will deliver thee from condemnation to everlasting fire and other torments? Noone, if thou thyself dost not placate the Compassionate One, forsaking thine evil
deeds and acquiring a right pleasing life, every day weeping over thy countless
transgressions, which thou committest at every hour in deed, word and thought,
and beseeching Christ to grant thee the complete forgiveness of them.
Verse: From the morning watch until night, * from the morning watch let
Israel hope in the Lord.
Let sinful habit not seize me, dragging me down, О Savior, nor let the demon,
which ever wageth war on me and subjecteth me to his will, gain dominance over
me; but rescue me from his dominion with Thy mighty hand, О Almighty One
Who lovest mankind, and reign Thou within me. Grant that I may be wholly
Thine, and living according to Thy will, О Word, may find rest in Thee, and
cleansing, salvation and great mercy for myself.
Then the Stichera for the saint, from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these
Stichera for the Forerunner, in Tone V, in the same melody:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
О blessed Forerunner and martyr of Christ, heal me who am wholly bowed
down to the earth and am incurably broken, yet I flee with faith to thy godly
protection. And rescue me, I pray thee, on the dread day, when I shall come to
stand before His judgment-seat, and shall be given over to torments; and as thou
hast unashamed boldness, О wise one, deliver me from standing on the left hand
of Christ, entreating Him Who granteth great mercy to the world.
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
As a most radiant luminary of the Sun, О wise Forerunner of Christ, shine
thou a ray of light upon me who have fallen down into the darkness of countless
evils, I pray thee. Raise me up out of the pit of sin, guiding me by thy sweet voice.
О thou who of old loosed the voice of thy father by thy birth, direct now my
voice, I pray thee, that with faith and love I may glorify God the Savior, the Lover
of mankind, Who grants the world great mercy.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
Thou wast the divine temple of God, the Bestower of life upon all, О blessed
prophet, Forerunner and herald, and didst have Him living in thy heart. Him do
thou ever entreat, О most noetically rich John, that those who have recourse to
thy holy temple and honor thee may become temples of the Spirit and draw nigh
unto God, that in hymns we may honor thy help and fervent prayer, for He bore
witness that thou art the greatest from all mankind, О right wondrous one.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
From my childhood I have been revealed to be a tireless committer of sins,
having been grievously wounded in mind and lovingly remained such by my many
evil habits. Downcast, I now weep over my cruel deception, mine evil habits and
mindlessness, and the destruction of my soul. О Lady, disdain me not who am
perishing in evil, but, taking pity, deliver me from every assault of the passions by
thine aid, that if only in old age I may repent before God.
Then, “О Joyous Light ...”, the Prokeimenon in Tone IV:
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him.
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou didst
hearken unto me.
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of repentance, in Tone V:
O Lord, I cease not to sin, nor do I perceive Thy love for mankind which
Thou hast granted me. Vanquish my lack of discernment, O Thou Who alone art
good, and have mercy upon me.
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress,
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us.
O Lord, from reverent fear of Thee I tremble, yet I cease not from committing
sins. Who, when called to trial, doth not fear the judge? Or who, desiring to be
healed, angereth the physician, as I do? O longsuffering Lord, have compassion
upon my weakness, and have mercy upon me.
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.
To the Martyrs: Having put on the breastplate of faith and armed themselves
with the image of the Cross, Thy saints, О Lord, manfully gave themselves over to
torments and cast down the pride and deception of the devil. As God almighty,
send down peace upon the world through their entreaties, and great mercy upon
our souls.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Assuage the sufferings of my much-sighing soul, * O thou that wipest every
tear from the face of the earth; * for thou dost banish the sufferings of mankind, *
and dispel the sorrows of the sinful. * For in thee do we all have our hope and
confirmation, ** O most holy Virgin Mother.
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion through Our
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal.
MONDAY NIGHT: TONE V
AT COMPLINE
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos
ODE I
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they
chanted a song of victory.
О good and most immaculate one, grant me contrition of soul, humility of
heart, purity of mind, correction of life, remission of transgressions and fountains
of tears.
Behold my tribulation and compunction, heal thou the stripes of mine ancient
transgressions, and grant me time to repent and confess my sins.
Glory ..., Pondering the abyss of mine evils, О all-immaculate one, I weep for
myself before my departure; wherefore, I beseech thee: Entreat thy Son, that He
deliver me from torment.
Now & ever ..., As thou hast time for repentance, О my soul, depart from all
evil and cry out with tears to thy Creator: О my God, save me by the supplications
of her who gave birth to Thee!
ODE III
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing *
and suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * who alone art good *
and the Lover of mankind.
The foremost of my passions have seized me, О most pure one, and have
filled me with shame who have been created according to the image and likeness
of God; yet deliver me from the harm thereof, for I hymn thee in compunction.
The enemy wickedly seeks to hunt me down, desiring to show me utterly
consumed in everlasting flame, О most pure one; yet set at naught his wiles and
counsels, that, rejoicing, I may glorify thee.
Glory ..., The enemies of the righteous have deceitfully set me in the uttermost
pit of many offenses, yet as one now helpless and wholly wounded, I call upon thy
supplication: О most immaculate Lady, save me!
Now & ever ..., I have wasted my life in slothfulness, wretch that I am, and
have now arrived at the gates of death; and, terrified of the assault of the enemy, I
cry unto thee: deliver me from their temptations, that saved, I may glorify thee.
ODE IV
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying,
O Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the
salvation of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed Ones.
I have been wounded by the darts of sin, and wounds now cover mine entire
body; wherefore, I cry out to thee, О most pure one: by thy speedy prayers heal
the wounds of my soul.
Have mercy upon thy servants, О pure one; for we have acquired thee as our
mediatress before God, and we pray that we be delivered from all want and
everlasting torment.
Glory ..., О good one, thou art my hope, shield and confirmation, my
deliverance from evils, the enlightenment of my soul, my boast, bulwark and
might.
Now & ever ..., Prodigally have I wasted the riches of good works which
Christ gave me, in that He is good. Yet disdain me not, О most pure Maiden, for I
am perishing of hunger.
ODE V
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O
Christ, * in that Thou alone art compassionate!
Behold the weakness of my lowly soul, О Lady, the infirmity of my flesh and
the captivity of my mind, and save me who am bereft of hope.
God to Whom thou hast given birth do thou ever entreat, that He save all of
us who confess thee to be the Theotokos, and glorify thy birthgiving, О most
pure one.
Glory ..., Who doth not call thee blessed, О all-immaculate one? For thou
didst ineffably give birth to the one Master, the Savior of the whole world.
Now & ever ..., О most pure one, send down upon me streams of tears, that,
having purified myself of the defilements and blemishes of my sins, I may hymn
the magnitude of thy goodness.
ODE VI
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its
soul-destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou
art compassionate.
I have been cast into the abyss of transgressions and iniquities, О allimmaculate one; yet stretch forth thy hand, and lead me up from the despair of
Hades.
I know the multitude of the offenses and thoughts which vex me; wherefore,
hasten thou and deliver me, О most pure one.
Glory ..., Take pity on thy servant, О Christ Master, by the supplications of
her who in purity gave birth to Thee, when Thou shalt come to judge the world
which Thou hast fashioned.
Now & ever ..., О pure Lady, my soul hath been dragged down into the abyss
of transgressions, to become food for the demons; wherefore, save me who am
beyond hope.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone V:
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”:
The greatly painful passions of my soul and the infirmities of my flesh do thou
quickly heal; still the wandering of my mind, О most immaculate Theotokos, and
grant that in serenity of thought I may offer pure prayers unto the King, and beg
remission offenses.
ODE VII
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, *
and bedewed the Youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed
art Thou!
When I bring to mind the multitude of mine unseemly deeds and
transgressions, О all-immaculate one, I am afraid and horrified. О Virgin, by thy
prayers free me from them.
The sleepless word and the unquenchable fire ever erode and devour my soul.
Let me not become food for them, О most holy Theotokos.
Glory ..., О all-immaculate Virgin, from the outmost darkness and dread
torment deliver thy servants who cry out to thy Son: О God, blessed art Thou!
Now & ever ..., I have defiled my flesh with shameful passions, and have
darkened by mind with vile thoughts; yet take pity, О pure one, and save me, Thy
useless servant.
ODE VIII
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace
chanted a hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him
throughout all ages.
Unto thee, the Theotokos, do I bring the weakness of my lowly soul, the
infirmity of my heart and the delusion of my mind; and I cry aloud, asking thine
aid, О Virgin.
Be Thou merciful to Thy servants, О Word, through the supplications of her
who gave birth to Thee, and save those who chant: О all ye works of the Lord,
hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!
Glory ..., О thou who hast given birth to Him Who hath willed mercy, have
mercy upon all who chant with faith: О all ye works of the Lord, hymn the Lord
and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!
Now & ever ..., Deliver me from the outermost darkness and the worm which
sleepeth not, О good Virgin, in that thou hast given birth to the Creator of the
world; for all things whatsoever He desireth, He can accomplish by thy prayers.
ODE IX
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and man; *
and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed.
God to Whom thou hast ineffably given birth, О pure Lady, do thou earnestly
beseech, that He deliver us from misfortunes and sorrows, and from the dread
judgment which is to come; and that He grant unto us the splendors of His saints.
I have sinned more than all others, disobeying Thy life-creating
commandments, О Christ, making myself like the irrational beasts; yet by the
prayers of Thy Mother, О Word, may I not be taken unrepentant from this life.
Glory ..., In that thou hast given birth to the Word of God, the Abyss of
mercy, О good one, have mercy upon the souls of all who flee beneath thy
protection; for thee have we all acquired as an unashamed intercessor before God.
Now & ever ..., Ask now for our purification and remission, deliverance from
all needs, and correction of life which is pure and radiant, О Mother of God, that
we may glorify thy great benificence.
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ...,
Troparion, and the rest as usual. Dismissal.
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE V
AT MATINS
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,
The Sessional hymns of repentance, in Tone V:
When the Judge shall take His seat and the angels stand before Him, when the
trumpet shall sound and the flame kindled, what shalt thou do, О my soul, when
thou art brought to judgment? For thine evils will then confront thee, and thy
secret sins will be laid bare. Wherefore, before the end cry out to the Judge:
Cleanse me, О God, and save me!
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy
wrath.
Let us all keep vigil and greet Christ with a plentitude of oil and radiant lamps,
that we may be deemed worthy to enter the bridal-chamber; for he who findeth
himself outside the gates shall cry unto God in vain: Have mercy on me!
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
The strange mystery of the Virgin * hath been revealed to the world as salvific:
* for from her wast seedlessly born, * and revealed in the flesh without
corruption. * The Joy of all, ** O Lord glory be to Thee!
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone V:
When thy deeds are laid bare, О my soul, and myriads of angels stand before
the Judge, what answer shalt thou find for thy shame, if thou wilt not cry out,
weeping, before the end: “I have sinned, О good Lord! Have mercy on me!”?
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy
wrath.
I lie upon the bed of mine offenses, robbed of my hope of salvation; for the
dreaming of my slothfulness winneth torment for my soul. О God Who wast
born from the Virgin, raise me up to Thy hymnody, that I may glorify Thee.
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.
To the Martyrs: Thou hast given us an indestructible bulwark, О Christ God:
the miracles of Thy holy martyrs. By their prayers make steadfast Thy faithful
people, in that Thou art good and the Lover of mankind.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Show forth thy ready protection, help and mercy * upon thy servants, O pure
one; * dampen the waves of vain thoughts, * and raise up my fallen soul, O
Theotokos, * for I know, O Virgin, I know, ** that thou canst do whatsoever
thou dost will. 
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone V:
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...“
The threefold waves of despair assail me who have fallen headlong into the
depths of sin; but in that Thou art almighty, О Christ, Pilot of all, go Thou before
me and in Thy tender compassion steer me to the calm harbor of dispassion, and
save me by the prayers of the Forerunner, О Savior.
Elizabeth was freed from barrenness, and the Virgin remained a virgin when
she conceived in her womb at the sound of Gabriel’s voice. And the Forerunner
John leapt up beforehand in his mother’s womb, perceiving in the womb of the
Virgin the God and Master, Who became incarnate for our salvation.
Glory ..., Now & ever,..: Theotokion:
O root that hath budded forth the divine flower, tabernacle and candlestick,
golden vessel of manna, holy table bearing the bread of life: with John the
Forerunner, intercede before Him, since He is thy son and God, that He may
grant mercy and salvation to all who acknowledge thee to be the very Theotokos!
ODE I
Canon of repentance, the acrostic whereof is “O Christ, grant us cleansing of
transgressions”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone V:
Irmos: A land which the sun had never beheld, * and upon which it had
never shined, * an abyss which the vault of heaven had not seen laid bare, *
hath Israel traversed dry-shod, O Lord. * And Thou didst lead them to Thy
mountain of sanctification, * as they sang and chanted * a hymn of victory.
Grant me cleansing of the things I have done, О Savior, and absolve me
before I depart from hence. Wash away my great filth, О Lord Who cleansed the
lepers, and grant that I may stand blamelessly before Thee Who wilt come to
judge the living and the dead.
The discharge which lieth upon the eyes of my soul prevents me from gazing
upon Thy beams, which Thou didst emit when Thou didst appear on earth, О
unapproachable Sun. Wash it away, О Savior, and grant that I may contemplate
the light of Thy grace, О compassionate Lord.
To the Martyrs: Full of vigilance, О blessed spiritual athletes, keepers of the
commandments of Christ, ye lulled to sleep all the evil of the enemy; wherefore, in
your divine vigilance raise me up to repentance, I pray, for I am weighed down by
the sleep of sin.
To the Martyrs: Contending in your flesh against the adverse foe, О martyrs,
ye vanquished him with the sword of the Cross and drowned him in the 
outpouring of your blood; and, singing and chanting a hymn of victory, ye have
received from God crowns of victory.
Theotokion: Deliver me from evil habits, О pure Virgin. Upon the rock of the
commandments establish me who am shaken by the machinations of him who of
old caused our first parents to fall. And grant that I may please Christ, singing well
and chanting a hymn of victory.
Another canon, of John the Forerunner, the acrostic whereof is “O Baptist, accept
this entreaty”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone V:
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they
chanted a song of victory.
A pure and immaterial way of life didst thou show forth in a material body, О
Forerunner; wherefore, we beseech thee: Make those who bless thee with faith
emulators of thyself.
O Forerunner who immersed Christ, the Abyss of compassion, in the river’s
streams, entreat Him to dry up the abyss of mine evils and to enlighten my mind, I
pray.
O Forerunner of the Savior, mediating causes of repentance for me, I pray
thee: Ask and entreat Him Who is the Lover of mankind, that I be granted the
compunction which washeth away the fetid mire of sin.
Theotokion: Without pain thou hast ineffably given birth unto Him Whom the
Father incorruptibly begat before all ages, О all-hymned Lady. Him do thou
beseech, that He save from all harm those who have recourse unto thee.
ODE III
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Do Thou establish my heart, O Lord, * which is shaken by the
billows of life, * and guide it to a calm haven, O God.
I promised Thee that I would repent, О God, yet still I commit sin. What will
become of me? How shall I find myself when Thou shalt come to judge the earth?
Let us offer supplication unto the Lord; let us sigh and shed the tears which
wash away defilement, that we may find deliverance in the world to come.
To the Martyrs: Their minds wholly dead, the violators of the law wounded
the victorious martyrs who love Life and confess Christ.
To the Martyrs: The choirs of the martyrs have been numbered with the
choirs of the noetic angels; becoming peers of the angels through the grace of the
divine Spirit.
Theotokion: Open now to me the gates of repentance, the portal of the Light,
О Virgin; and forbid the passions entry into my humbled soul.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing *
and suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * who alone art good *
and the Lover of mankind.
Ever pouring forth healings upon those who approach thy temple with faith,
О wondrous Forerunner, I pray thee: Cure the passions of my heart, which most
wretchedly grows within me through negligence, О thou who art most noetically
rich.
I sigh and am ever wracked by lamentations when I think of Thine inexorable
judgment, О only most-righteous Judge. By the supplications of Thy Forerunner,
preserve me uncondemned there, О Lord my God.
As the mediator between the Old and the New Covenants through thy divine
mediations, О glorious Forerunner, I cry to thee: By repentance renew me who
am grown old through many sins, that I may honor thee in praise.
Theotokion: О holy Virgin Mother who alone art all-immaculate: Lift from us
the blame of transgressions, enlighten our minds, purify our hearts, and deliver us
all from everlasting condemnation, we pray.
ODE IV
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: I have heard Thy report, O Lord, * and I was afraid. * I came to
knowledge of Thy dispensation, * and I glorified Thee, O only Lover of
mankind.
Paying no heed to Thine enlightening words, О Lord, I have committed deeds
of darkness, and I fear Thy dread tribunal in the life to come.
If we give wings to the ship of our soul with the sail of the fear of God, we
shall reach the havens of repentance, escaping the threefold waves of evils.
To the Martyrs: О martyrs, ye have been revealed to be divine mountains
which let fall sweetness, and the divinely-planted garden having within it the Lord,
the Tree of life.
To the Martyrs: With arrows of patience and perseverance ye shot down the
demonic foe, and have received crowns of glory.
Theotokion: О most pure Lady, intercessor for sinners, divine correction of
those who have fallen, thou art glorified as she who gave birth to God.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying,
O Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the
salvation of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed Ones.
As a true warrior of Christ the King, thou hast made thine abode in the
kingdom on high, O Baptist. Unceasingly entreat Him, that He have pity on those
who honor thee.
Foreseeing the gratefulness of thy heart, the Lord sanctified thee from thy
mother’s womb, О blessed one. Him do thou entreat, that He sanctify us all, we
pray.
Thou didst announce the coming of Him Who died for our sake unto all the
dead. Him do thou beseech, О Forerunner, that He give life to me who have died,
and save me.
Theotokion: Have mercy on me, О only most immaculate one, for thou hast
ineffably given birth unto God Who is merciful in His surpassing goodness; and
deliver me from everlasting torments.
ODE V
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Hasten Thou and have compassion on my wretched soul, * which
doth battle at night * with the darkness of the passions. * Shine in me with
the brightness of the day, * O noetic Sun, * and thereby make the night
give way to light.
There is no salvation for me in my works, for I have committed many sins on
earth, wretch that I am, and I shall tremble before Thy dread judgment-seat when
thou shalt judge those who have broken Thy commandments, О God.
How mindless have I been! How dark I have become by doing evil deeds!
How I have failed to understand the fear of Thee, О Christ! I have fallen face
down upon the ground and made myself like the irrational beasts; yet grant me
conversion, О God of all.
To the Martyrs: The cloud of martyrs hath dispelled the clouds of bitter
torments, shining forth the daylight of true understanding, destroying the gloom
of polytheism, and reaching the unapproachable Light.
To the Martyrs: Sanctify my mind by the supplications of Thy holy martyrs, I
pray, О Christ, and show me to be full of enlightenment, and a partaker of
everlasting glory, that, rendering glory, I may hymn Thee, О Savior.
Theotokion: At the ineffable word thou hast given birth for us, О Virgin
Mother, unto God Who through thy blessed mediations hath granted repentance
unto all who have greatly sinned, О refuge and haven of the faithful.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O
Christ, * in that Thou alone art compassionate!
The womb of the barren one gave birth unto thee, О Forerunner, through thy
right fruitful words showing forth as right fertile our hearts which are void of
good works; wherefore, we call thee blessed.
In the desert places thou didst blossom like a right fragrant lily, О ever-blessed
one; wherefore, we cry out to thee: Drive all the fetor of evil from my soul, О
Forerunner.
Thou didst stand between the law and grace, О all-wise one; wherefore, I cry
aloud: Have pity on me who am afflicted with wretchedness and am vanquished
by the law of sin, О Forerunner.
Theotokion: О most pure one, impassable portal of glory, open unto me the
gates of repentance, winning for me divine entry and rest in the life to come.
ODE VI
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: Even as Thou didst deliver the Prophet from the beast, O Lord, * so
do Thou lead me up from the depths * of unrestrained passions, I pray
Thee, * that I may dare * to look upon Thy holy temple.
Now is the time to change our ways, yet I always lie prostrate, ever stuck in
great senselessness. But releasing me from the darkness of my heart, О Word,
have pity on me.
Have pity on me who groan, as once Thou hadst pity on the publican, О
compassionate Christ; and grant that I may weep fervent tears like the harlot, that
I also may wash away the filth of my many transgressions
To the Martyrs: О great martyrs of Christ, from the great flame in Gehenna,
which awaiteth me there, rescue me who have sinned greatly, that I may ever
greatly glorify your memory.
To the Martyrs: Having struggled well, Thy passion-bearers were radiantly
crowned by Thy life-creating right hand, О Lord and God. By their honored
intercessions save all Thy people.
Theotokion: О divinely joyous tabernacle of holiness, precious ark, lampstand
of the divine Light, table of the Bread of life, animate palace of the Word: Show
me to be a temple of the Spirit.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its
soul-destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou
art compassionate.
Resplendent with ineffable beams, О Forerunner of Christ, by thine effective
supplications illumine the hearts of those who piously praise thee.
О Forerunner of Christ, with grace illumining me, who am held fast in the
sleep of slothfulness, assiduously rouse me to do those things which God willeth.
From every tribulation caused by the adversary deliver us who have acquired
thee as a divine intercessor and advocate before the Master, О blessed one.
Theotokion: The tempest of sin assails me, О most pure Theotokos. Make
haste to deliver me, guiding me to the haven of repentance, О all-immaculate one.
ODE VII
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: The prayer of the Children quenched the fire * and the furnace
which bedewed them proclaimed the miracle, * for it neither burned nor
consumed those, * who chanted hymns unto the God of our Fathers.
Forgive Thou mine iniquities, mine injustices and my countless offenses, О
Christ, and in the greatness of Thy compassions, О God, deliver me from the
torment which is to come.
Like the prodigal I have now squandered all the wealth I once received, and I
am beset by starvation, deprived of divine food. Accept me, the penitent, О
Savior, and save me.
To the Martyrs: Your members mortified by many tortures, ye rendered dead
the warring foe, О right wondrous martyrs of the Lord; wherefore, we the faithful
piously hymn you.
To the Martyrs: О martyrs, with patience and valor ye impaled hordes of the
demons and all the multitude of tormentors, and have now been transported to
true Life.
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to be a haven of salvation for all, О pure
one, stilling the tempest of the passions and leading to tranquility all who are
humble on the earth, О pure Birthgiver of God.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, *
and bedewed the Youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed
art Thou!
With words we entreat thee who art the Forerunner of the Word: As thou
didst loose the voice of thy father at thy birth, so loose thou the snares of our
transgressions.
O all-radiant sun who shinest the radiance of salvation upon me, deliver me
from the darkness of the passions which vex my darkened heart.
I have acquired an unfruitful soul and a barren heart, О divine offspring of the
barren woman. О Baptist of Christ, pray thou without ceasing, that I may produce
the fruits of repentance.
Triadicon: Let us glorify the Son Who is equal to the Father, and the Holy
Spirit, the indivisible Trinity, chanting in a godly manner: О God, blessed art
Thou!
Theotokion: О all-immaculate one, thou hast given birth to Christ as a little
Child, Who worketh the renewal of us who have grown old through the ancient
transgression.
ODE VIII
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: O ye company of Angels, * and assembly of mankind; * ye priests,
Levites, and peoples: * praise, bless, and supremely exalt the King and
Creator of all, * throughout all ages.
Behold, the sores of my soul have putrefied and grown fetid, О Christ, and I
have suffered and been humbled thereby; but treat me, О Savior, with the
medicines of repentance.
By deception the most wicked serpent defrauded me and filled me with evils;
but, sighing, I cry: О Word, reject me not, who am condemned and brought low!
To the Martyrs: Ye turned not away from a higher standing, О all-praised
ones, and ye cast down the enemies of the Cross who sought to undermine you,
utterly vanquishing them, О most wise ones.
To the Martyrs: О all-praised martyrs of the Lord, neither fire, nor the sword,
nor wild beasts, nor starvation, nor the crushing wheel, nor any other torture was
able to separate you from Christ the Lover of mankind.
Theotokion: О Mother of God, boast of angels and salvation of all, be thou a
surety for me, that I may find and receive remission of the sins I have committed
in the past, in knowledge and in ignorance.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace
chanted a hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him
throughout all ages.
Thou didst wash the assembly of the people in the streams of the Jordan,
preaching repentance, О great Forerunner; wherefore, I cry out to thee: Dry up
the stream of my passions, sending forth wellsprings of tears upon me.
Be thou wholly atremble, О my soul, pondering the judgment-seat of the
Almighty; and cry aloud: О Compassionate One, for the sake of Thy Forerunner
have pity and save me, and deliver me from torments.
I move mine unclean lips and defiled tongue in prayer to thee, О holy
Forerunner: Hasten thou quickly, and help me, who am unceasingly shaken by all
the assaults of the deceiver.
Triadicon: О consubstantial Trinity - Father, Son and Spirit - rain down upon
us remission offenses, that, having received perfect salvation, we may supremely
exalt Thee throughout all ages.
Theotokion: О divinely joyous one, by thine exalted birthgiving thou hast
raised us up from the pit into which we have fallen; wherefore, with grateful
voices, О Maiden, we hymn thee with faith throughout all ages.
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...”, and make prostrations.
ODE IX
Canon of Repentance
Irmos: For the Mighty One hath done great things to thee, * in that He
showed thee forth as a pure Virgin * even after giving birth, * since thou art
she that hath seedlessly borne her own creator, * wherefore, O Theotokos,
* we magnify thee.
That I may magnify Thy long-suffering, I cry to Thee: О Jesus, be Thou yet
patient with me, and hew me not down like the barren fig tree, but let me produce
for Thee the fruits of repentance.
How awesome art Thou, О Thou Who alone art mighty and powerful! Who
will withstand the dread threat of Thee when Thou Thyself shalt come to sit in
judgment? When that shall take Thy place, preserve me uncondemned.
To the Martyrs: By your divine pangs ye take away the pains of my body, О
spiritual athletes of the Lord; wherefore, heal the most grievous passions of my
soul, in that ye are most skilled physicians.
To the Martyrs: The shrines of your relics shine forth more brightly than the
rays of the sun with rays of divine grace, enlightening hearts and illumining the
souls of those who praise you with faith, О passion-bearers.
Theotokion: О thou who art full of the grace of God, thou hast truly been
revealed to be the radiant cloud which leadeth the new people to the promised
land, and the gate which leadeth to life; wherefore, we magnify thee, О
Theotokos.
Canon of the Forerunner
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and man; *
and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed.
Lo! the majesty of thy temple is acknowledged to be heaven on earth, О
Forerunner of Christ, and with divine rays thou enlightenest those who approach
it and who now bless thee therein every day.
As the true friend of the Master, О all-blessed Baptist, strengthen me to love
Him without wavering, and with an upright character, and to spurn the corrupting
passions which lead me into the pit of perdition.
Thou wast not a reed shaken by contrary winds, О most wise one, but rather
our divine confirmation and the unshakable fortification of the Church, which do
thou preserve unshaken by thy supplications, causing every temptation to cease.
The coming of the Creator is at hand! Why, therefore, dost thou not weep
over thyself, О my wretched soul - living in indifference. But arise, and cry out to
the Lord: Have pity on me, О Savior, through the supplications of the Forerunner, in that Thou lovest mankind!
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be the radiant chariot of the Sun Who
shone forth from thy womb and broke the cruel darkness of delusion, О allimmaculate and pure one. Wherefore, with faith we bless thee as is meet.
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...”, and a prostration.
Litany: Let us complete ..., Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms.
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of repentance, in Tone V:
Turn away from the multitude of my transgressions O Lord, Who wast born
of the Virgin, and cleanse me of all my sins. I beseech Thee to grant me the
thought of turning back unto Thee, for Thou alone art the Lover of mankind, and
have mercy upon me. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons.
Woe is me, to whom am I like? I am like the barren fig tree, and I fear that I
shall be cursed and cut down. But, do Thou O heavenly Husbandman, make my
barren soul fruitful, O Christ God, and receive me as the Prodigal Son, and have
mercy upon me.
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our
hands do Thou guide aright.
To the Martyrs: Thy passion-bearers, О Lord, emulators of the angelic ranks,
endured tortures as though bodiless, and in oneness of mind possessed the hope
of enjoyment of the good things promised them. By their prayers, О Christ God,
grant peace to Thy world and great mercy to our souls.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
O thou who art full of grace, * intercede by thy supplications, * and beg that a
multitude of compassions be granted to our souls * and the cleansing of our many
sins, ** we entreat thee.
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia.
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal.
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE V
AT LITURGY
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone V:
Believing Thee to be God, the thief on the cross confessed Thee, О Christ,
crying out in purity from the depths of his heart: Remember me, О Lord, in Thy
kingdom!
As Thou didst justify the harlot who wept from the depths of her soul, О
Christ, so do Thou rescue me from all torment, for I am in despair, О good
Master, I entreat Thee.
Together let us bless John, who went before Christ and prepared His goodly
ways, that through his divine supplications we may be delivered from
transgressions.
To the Martyrs: О holy martyrs, who drained the cup of Christ with a fervent
soul: With the downpour of your divine prayers deliver us from turbid sins and
ailments.
Glory ..., О unapproachable God, almighty Trinity and Unity: By the
supplications of Thy Forerunner save me, delivering me from darkness and the
flame which awaiteth me.
Now & ever ..., Ever defiled by wicked acts, I beseech thee, the undefiled
Mother of the Master: Cleanse me of all defilement, О Lady!
On Tuesday, the Prokeimenon in Tone VII:
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord *
and shall hope in Him.
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and
like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our
God they shall blossom forth.
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he
shall not be afraid of evil tidings. 