WEDNESDAY EVENING: TONE VI
AT VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 3 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone VI:
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness.
Ye became ministers of the great mysteries of God, О theologians and
disciples who beheld God, and have received the grace of healings; curing the
diseases of all.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
Ye are the great refuge and protection of our souls and the expulsion of evil
spirits, О apostles of the Lord who beheld God; wherefore, we ever honor you.
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
From every evil circumstance, from harm wrought by the demons, from
transgressions and wretched captivity, deliver those who honor you with faith, О
divine and blessed apostles.
Then the Stichera for the saint, from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these
Stichera of the holy & great Nicholas the wonderworker, in the same melody:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
О blessed Nicholas, have pity on me who fall prostrate, I beseech thee, and
enlighten the eyes of my soul, that I may gaze with purity upon the compassionate
Bestower of light.
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
As thou hast boldness before God, О holy one, deliver me from the enemy
who seeks to oppress me. О blessed hierarch Nicholas, save me from harm and
deliver me from men of blood.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
We, the faithful, have now acquired thee as a calm haven, an unassailable
rampart, a pillar of strength, a door to repentance, and the guide and bulwark of
our souls, О holy hierarch.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Envying thy flock, О most pure one, the wicked adversary ever striveth to
make it his food; but do thou, О Theotokos, deliver us from his harm.
Then, “О Joyous Light ...”, the Prokeimenon in Tone V:
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do
Thou judge me.
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my
mouth.
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone VI:
Once, the apostles trolled the depths of the sea with nets, О Lord, and likewise
the heights of the kingdom for the sake of their doctrines. In the first, they
skillfully tested the unfathomable depths; and in the other they attained through
faith Thine infinite bosom, and they proclaimed Thy timeless Son to the world. By
their supplications and those of all the saints, have mercy on us.
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her mistress,
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us.
Once, when Thy disciples were tempest-tossed in a boat, О Christ, they cried
out: “O Master, save us! For we are perishing!” And we now cry aloud: We pray
Thee О our Savior and Lover of mankind, deliver us from our tribulations!
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.
To the Martyrs: Thy Cross was the invincible weapon of the martyrs, О Lord;
for they looked upon imminent death, foreseeing the life which is to come, and
they were strengthened by hope in Thee. By their prayers have mercy upon us!
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
The eye of my heart longingly seeketh thee, * O Lady; disdain not my feeble
sigh. * At the hour when thy Son shall judge the world, ** be thou my protection
and helper.
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion through Our
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal.
WEDNESDAY NIGHT: TONE VI
AT COMPLINE
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos
ODE I
Irmos: A helper and a protector * hath become unto me salvation. * My
God, whom I will glorify, * the God of my fathers, * and I will exalt Him *
for gloriously hath He been glorified.
How can I, who am wholly sunk in the passions, wretch that I am, and am
clothed in impurities, approach thee, О pure one? Yet, taking pity, save mine
accursed soul, О most pure Birthgiver of God.
Arising out of the depths of shame, О my lowly soul, cry aloud with fervor to
her who alone is pure: Have mercy upon me, О most immaculate and pure
Maiden, and deliver me from the passions!
Glory ..., I have been engulfed by a storm of perils and sins; but extend now
thy helping hand unto me, О pure one, and deliver me from the indignity of the
passions, that I may ever glorify thee.
Now & ever ..., Deliver me from the cruel tempest of sin, whereby I have been
wholly defiled, О Birthgiver of God. As I flee unto thee, lighten now the burden
of my transgressions.
ODE III
Irmos: O Lord, upon the rock * of Thy commandments * make firm my
heart, * for Thou alone art Holy and Lord.
О most immaculate one, make me young who have aged through the shameful
passions of sin, easing the bonds of my transgressions.
Cleanse me of the mire and filth of sin, О Theotokos, and make a divine
temple of me who flee to thee who art pure.
Glory ..., Awake thou from the sleep of despondency, О my wretched soul,
and lift up thine eyes to the divine Bride and Maiden who alone saveth thee.
Now & ever ..., In desperation and contrition, I hasten and fly to thy fervent
supplication, О Lady: Save me, thy servant, О pure one!
ODE IV
Irmos: The prophet heard * of Thy coming, O Lord, * and he was afraid. *
How wast Thou to be born of a virgin * and appear unto mankind? * and
he said * "I have heard report of Thee and I am afraid"; * glory to Thy
power, O Lord.
I shall rightly be judged by thy Son for my words and deeds, О most
immaculate Birthgiver of God. May I find thee at that hour to be a refuge and
most mighty ally, saving me from all torments.
My life is vile, my character is rendered impure through sins, and I am wholly
sunk in the passions. О pure one, cleanse me of the defilement of my
transgressions, and make me as white as snow by thy mediation before our tenderhearted God.
Glory ..., I am bound all over by the bonds of mine offenses, and am unable to
move toward the paths of repentance. Stretch forth thy hand, О most immaculate
one, and direct me to the path which leadeth me to the way of salvation.
Now & ever ..., By thy prayers free me from cruel torments, from the
outermost darkness and Gehenna, О Virgin; for thou hast the will and power so
to do, О thou who hast given birth to the Lord Who alone is supremely good.
ODE V
Irmos: Out of the night I seek Thee early, * enlighten me I pray Thee, O
Lover of mankind, * and guide me in Thy commandments, * and teach me,
O Savior, * to do Thy will.
On the day of judgment reveal thyself, О Lady, and stand as an advocate for
me, freeing me from torments and fire, that, saved, I may hymn thine invincible
grace.
Seeing that I have wandered away from thy protection, О Lady, the enemy
hath cast my soul into the depths of transgressions, and beholding me he laughs
me to scorn; but do thou help me.
Glory ..., Make mine accursed and passion-plagued soul to arise, I beseech
thee, О pure and most immaculate one, and remove from it the weight of its
many sins.
Now & ever ..., I offer thee entreaty from my defiled and impure lips, О most
immaculate one: Take pity on me by thy prayers, I beseech thee.
ODE VI
Irmos: With my whole heart, I cried * unto the tenderly compassionate
God, * and he heard me * from the lowest depths of Hades; * and raised up
my life from corruption.
Accept me who am prodigal and most accursed, О Master Christ, and free me
from torments through the prayers of her who gave birth to Thee, and deliver me
from standing on Thy left side.
The dark fear of hell embraces me, О pure one, and the lot of the goats doth
terrify me. Deliver me from such things, О most pure Theotokos, I pray thee.
Glory ..., Mortifying the passions of my flesh, О pure Lady Theotokos, impart
life to my most wretched soul, and guide me to the straight path.
Now & ever ..., Though I am a fool, yet I offer thee the supplication of a
servant, and I flee to thy compassionate loving-kindness. Turn me not away
ashamed, О pure one.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone VI:
I offer thee groaning from my heart and the depths of my being, О most
immaculate one, asking thy right conciliatory aid. Have mercy upon my most
passionate soul, and move the most merciful God to pity, that He may deliver me
from damnation and the lake of fire, О thou who alone art blessed.
ODE VII
Irmos: We have sinned, we have transgressed, * and we have done evil
before Thee. * We have not kept nor followed * Thy commandments, but
reject us not utterly, * O God of our fathers.
Knowing thee, to be the merciful and right loving Virgin Mother, and wholly
pure, I flee to thee, wretch that I am. Turn me not away from thee ashamed, О
all-immaculate one.
Awaken, О passion-plagued soul! Arise, О wretched one! Beat thou thy breast,
and from thine innermost depths send forth fountains of tears, that the Mother of
Christ God may have mercy upon thee who art accursed.
Glory ..., Of old I became a temple of God through divine baptism, but I have
wholly defiled myself, wretch that I am, and am grievously brought low through
terrible falls. Yet do thou raise me up, О most immaculate one, thou hope of the
despairing.
Now & ever ..., A dense cloud hath covered my heart, and darkness and gloom
hath come upon my passion-plagued soul. О Bride of God, illumine me with rays
of repentance, that I may glorify thee.
ODE VIII
Irmos: Him whom the hosts of heaven glorify, * and before whom tremble
the Cherubim and Seraphim, * let every breath and all creation * praise,
bless, and supremely exalt, * throughout all ages.
The river of fire terrifies me, and thick darkness causes me to quake; the worm
and the gnashing of teeth fill me with horror. Virgin, at that hour may I find thee
to be a mighty ally.
Let me not become fuel for the fire, О Lord, neither let me hear Thy voice
pronounce sentence, for I have Thy pure Mother beseeching Thee. I cry to Thee:
By her prayers have mercy upon me.
Glory ..., Make me to hear the divine voice, and show me to share a place with
the elect, О Christ; let me not occupy a place of lamentation, for I have the
Theotokos beseeching Thee for this.
Now & ever ..., Send streams of tears now down upon me, and cause groaning
to erupt within me from the depth of my soul, О pure one, that I may ever fall
down before thy protection and receive the remission of my sins through thy
prayer.
ODE IX
Irmos: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a
mother who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth of
God hath renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship and
magnify thee * as the Bride and Mother of God.
The day of judgment terrifies me, О Virgin; the gnashing of teeth fills my
heart with dread, and the place where the goats stand horrifies me; but let me find
thee, the Theotokos, to be my help amid evils when I shall be judged.
Trembling doth now seize me, and the horror of Gehenna terrifies me. What
shall I do? I know not, accursed and condemned as I am. Therefore, I flee unto
thee and cry out with fervent compunction: Disdain me not, О most pure one!
Glory ..., Beholding the judgment-seat, I think upon thy judgment, О my
Christ, whereat I, who am condemned, shall be rightly judged for my deeds. Yet
may I have as an advocate in that hour - Thy Mother, the divine Bride - entreating
Thy great compassions.
Now & ever ..., Noetically touching thy feet, О all-immaculate one, I beseech
thee: Accept my lamentation, hearken to my hymnody, and grant me remission of
transgressions through thy supplications, I pray thee, that I may magnify thee with
love.
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” Trisagion through Our Father ..., Troparion, and the
rest as usual. Dismissal.
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE VI
AT MATINS
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,
The Sessional hymns of the apostles, in Tone VI:
As Thou didst come into the midst of Thy disciples, О Savior, bestowing Thy
peace upon them, come amongst us, and save us.
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words
unto the ends of the world.
The choir of Thy disciples enlightened the whole world; for having once been
fishermen, they became fishers of men. For their sake, О God, have mercy on us!
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Great is the multitude of my many transgressions, О Theotokos. Unto thee
have I fled, О pure one, in need of salvation. Visit mine ailing soul, and entreat
thy Son and our God, that He grant me forgiveness for the evils I have done, О
thou only blessed one.
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone VI:
Sent unto the ends of the earth, О Savior, Thy disciples piously fished for the
nations as for fish, and brought them to Thy goodness. Wherefore, for their sake
we cry out to Thee, О Christ: Grant great mercy to Thy people!
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament
proclaimeth the work of His hands.
The twelve apostles, twelve times radiant, have appeared to the earth like the
sun. For their sake Thou didst cause the planter of deception to wither up, and for
their sake Thou dost illumine the souls of Thy servants. Save us for their sake, in
that Thou art full of tender compassion!
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.
To the Martyrs: The memory of Thy saints hath appeared today like the
paradise in Eden, О Lord; for therein all creation rejoiceth, and by their prayers
Thou hast granted us peace and great mercy.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
О all-holy Theotokos, throughout my lifetime forsake me not, to human
protection entrust me not; but do thou thyself defend and have mercy on me.
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone VI:
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”:
Like lightning hath the saving proclamation of Thy most wise disciples gone
forth into all the earth, О Christ, enlightening those in darkness and evil, and
making us children of the day and the light; wherefore, all creation piously
glorifies Thee.
Trading their boats for the net of the divine Faith, the fishermen drew forth all
mankind from the depths of vainglory, gaving unto God those who are pious and
ever magnify Him.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
O holy Lady, pure Mother of our God, * who didst ineffably give birth unto
the Creator of all; * with the sacred apostles ever entreat His goodness, * that He
deliver us from the passions ** and grant us the remission of sins.
ODE I
Canon of the holy, glorious & most lauded apostles, the composition of
Theophanes, in Tone VI:
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing
their pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song
of victory.
О divinely eloquent ones, who became a light unto the world, illumine us with
splendid radiance; and deliver us from the night of the passions and the gloom of
temptations, О divinely blessed ones. (Twice)
With honor the Spirit set you as honored princes throughout the whole world,
О disciples of the Lord; wherefore, as ye vanquished the prince of the air, deliver
the faithful.
Like coals burning with immaterial fire, О most wise ones, utterly consume my
material passions, guiding me to the light of dispassion and life.
Theotokion: Through the supplications of the apostles, prophets and martyrs,
and of the pure one who gave birth to Thee, О Lord Jesus, King of all, have pity
on those who have sinned against Thee.
Another canon, of the holy Nicholas the wonderworker, the acrostic whereof is
“Accept my sixth hymn, О Nicholas”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VI:
Irmos: The lecherous Pharaoh was drowned with all his warriors, * and
Israel, crossing through the midst of the sea, * cried aloud exclaiming: *
Let us chant unto the Lord God, * for He hath been glorified!
О most wise father, who dwellest joyfully in the heavens: By thy mediation
dispel every vexation of the evil one from the hearts of those who together hymn
Thee with faith on earth.
О father Nicholas, those who with faith have recourse to thy holy protection
do thou strengthen now against the harmful passions, the corrupting foe and all
the malice of the deceiver.
With the therapy of thy prayers, О Nicholas, cure us who have been wounded
by invisible darts, that we may walk the paths of the Lord in health.
Theotokion: The Son Who is equally eternal with the Father hath in these
latter times desired to make His abode within thy womb, О Theotokos, for the
regeneration of us, the faithful; wherefore, we hymn thee.
ODE III
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast
exalted the horn of The faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon
the rock * of Thy confession.
The divine Spirit, giving fire to your tongues by His dread coming, hath
through you restored to life those who are broken, О glorious apostles. (Twice)
What mercy shall I, who sin in mind, find on the day of judgment? Wherefore,
I cry unto Thee: For the sake of Thy disciples, have pity on me, who am selfcondemned!
О glorious apostles, who emulated the saving sufferings of Christ, as
physicians heal ye the cruel temporal passions of my soul.
Theotokion: For the sake of the Theotokos and Thine apostles, О Christ,
grant conversion to me, the sinner; have mercy upon me, as Thou art God, and
free me from everlasting fire, О Savior.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: Having established my thoughts upon the firm rock of Thy Faith, *
make steadfast my soul, О Lord; * for I have Thee as my refuge * and
confirmation, * О Good One.
Thou didst clearly receive victory over the soul-corrupting passions, О allblessed Nicholas. By thy prayers deliver us who are ever badly vanquished by
them.
Having mortified thy carnal members by asceticism, thou didst pass over to
the life which waxeth not old, О wise one. Pray thou that we who praise thee
joyfully may likewise receive it.
Cease not to visit us from the heights of heaven, О holy hierarch, By thy
prayers unto God dispelling all the difficulties of life.
Theotokion: Ever driving all gloom from our souls By thy prayers, О pure
one, beseech the Redeemer, that He grant us remission of sins.
ODE IV
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church
divinely singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord.
О right calm havens, harbors safe from storms, steer me to the tranquil haven
for I am tempest-tossed by the threefold waves of grievous transgressions.
(Twice)
Sigh, О my soul! Shed tears, О my soul! My lowly heart hath in nowise cleaved
unto the Good One, that God may deliver thee from the coming flame and
torment.
Entreat the Savior and Lord, О all-blessed apostles who were high priests
among men, that He save us from evil temptations, in that He is the Lover of
mankind.
Theotokion: О most pure Virgin, immaculate Virgin, with the apostles
supplicate for us, that we may be delivered from grievous temptations and
misfortunes.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the report of Thee * and was afraid; * I have
seen Thy works and was amazed. * Glory to Thy power, O Lord.
Entreating our God, the Bestower of good things, О holy Nicholas, heal mine
uncorrected heart, which hath been wounded by the deceiver.
Thou didst demolish the temples of perdition, О favorite of Christ; wherefore,
I entreat thee with faith, О Nicholas: Destroy thou the evil idols of my mind!
Through righteous works thou didst become fragrant myrrh, О divinely wise
one, adorning thy throne in Myra, О holy hierarch father Nicholas.
Theotokion: О unwedded Lady, blessed Birthgiver of God: From all harm
save those who hymn thee, О only helper of mankind.
ODE V
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of
those who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee,
O Word of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of
sin.
О disciples of the Word, who manifestly traveled the way which leadeth to life
by the exceeding narrow path of temptations and tribulations: Smooth ye the path
of my soul. (Twice)
О apostles of Christ, ye luminaries of the divine East, deliver me from the
darkness of the passions and the gloom of pleasures, temptations, evil
circumstances, tempest and misfortunes.
О apostles, ye scrolls who beheld God, pray that I may be enrolled in the
Book of Life, by your prayers rending asunder the evil record of my sins.
Theotokion: By the supplications to thy Son of thee and the divine apostles, О
only all-hymned Maiden, save me who trust in thee, О my salvation and hope, the
unashamed hope of all.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: О Christ Who shineth Thy light upon the world, * illumine my heart
* for I cry out to Thee in the night, * and save me.
By thy mediations, О Nicholas, earnestly wake me who am stuck fast by the
slumber of slothfulness.
Entreat Jesus the Savior, О holy hierarch Nicholas, that He deliver me from
everlasting torment.
By thy prayers, О holy hierarch Nicholas, preserve me from the hindrances of
the world and from the vexation of the demons.
Theotokion: He Who hath granted us existence made His abode within thee,
О Theotokos. Him do thou entreat, that He save us.
ODE VI
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, *
I run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from
corruption, * O Most Merciful One.
О glorious ones, ye truly and clearly had within your souls the honorable laws,
like tablets graven by the Spirit, and thereby abolished the law in the Scriptures,
saving the world. (Twice)
О sinful soul who hath insanely enslaved thyself to evil habits, turn and be
converted, and cry out to the compassionate Lord: For the sake of the apostles, О
Word, save me!
At Thine awesome and dread coming, number me among Thy chosen sheep
on Thy right hand, through the prayers of Thy divine preachers, О innocent
Lamb Who wast slain for all.
Theotokion: The choirs of incorporeal servants beseeches Thee, О
beginningless Son of God, and with her who gave birth to Thee the assemblies of
the disciples entreats Thee: Grant Thy mercies unto Thy people!
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: Slain by the sea-monster of sin, * I cry unto Thee, О Christ: * Free
me from corruption, * as Thou didst the prophet.
Possessing thee as a noetic lamp, О Nicholas, creation is enlightened with the
rays of innumerable miracles.
О Nicholas, tireless advocate for those who have recourse unto thee, deliver
me from the evil sleep of slothfulness.
Of old, О wise one, thou didst deliver those who were to be unjustly put to
death. In like manner deliver me also from misfortunes and transgressions, О
Nicholas.
Theotokion: О only pure and joyous Virgin, help me who am ever tempesttossed by the perils of life.
ODE VII
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant
to cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.
Drawing all mankind forth from the depths of delusion with the hook of the
word, О apostles, ye brought them to the Word Who was slain for our sake,
chanting unto Him: Blessed is the God of our fathers! (Twice)
Having conversed directly with Him Who revealed Himself in a material body,
О apostles, ye were enlightened by His luminous brilliance; wherefore, enlighten
me who cry aloud: Blessed is the God of our fathers!
Entreat the good Shepherd, О divine disciples, that He seek me who am lost
among the mountains of disobedience and save me who earnestly cries aloud:
Blessed is the God of our fathers!
Theotokion: With the prophets, apostles and martyrs entreat Him to Whom
thou hast given birth, О Virgin, that He deliver me from the evils of earth; and
grant that I may share in the good things of heaven, О Lady.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: Hearkening to the hymnody of Thy venerable children * Thou didst
bedew the burning furnace: * О Lord God of our fathers blessed art Thou!
With the power of God thou didst trample hordes of heretics underfoot, О allblessed Nicholas, saving thy flock from their deceit.
О father Nicholas, who appeared to those at sea, thou didst also feed thy
suffering city. By thy prayers deliver me from soul corrupting famine.
By thy prayers, О father Nicholas, make steadfast those who call upon thee for
aid, stilling the evil storm of the demons.
Theotokion: О Sovereign Lady of all mankind, holy Theotokos, By thy prayers
utterly free me from slavery to the passions.
ODE VIII
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ,
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all
ages.
With the scythe of your prayers mow down all the tares of my mind, О divine
husbandmen, apostles of the Savior, that I may produce as grain the fruit of
salvation. (Twice)
With the plough of the word ye cultivated hardened hearts, О ye who beheld
God; and, having sown precious doctrine therein, ye reaped the saved an
hundredfold.
Having lulled the malice of the enemy to sleep, ye fell into sleep like that of
the righteous, becoming unsleeping advocates for us, О disciples of the Word,
throughout all ages.
Theotokion: By the supplications of the prophets and martyrs, of Thine
apostles and her who ineffably contained Thee within her womb, the Virgin who
knew not a man, О Lord, deliver me from the unquenchable fire.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: Thy venerable Children in the furnace * likened to the cherubim *
chanted the thrice-holy hymn * Bless ye, praise ye and supremely exalt ye
the Lord throughout all ages.
Known to the whole world, thou didst appear hastening to the heights of an
exceedingly radiant life, О God-bearing Nicholas, enlightening those in darkness
with divers miracles.
Fill with grace those who keep divine vigil and honor thee, О Nicholas; and
lull to sleep the malice of the adversaries who assail us, О blessed one.
О holy hierarch Nicholas, as one who crushed all the snares of the enemy with
the might of the Spirit, by thy prayers deliver me from them, piloting my life, О
divinely wise one.
Theotokion: О Birthgiver of God, we hymn thee for whose sake the curse was
annulled and blessing hath come upon all who acknowledge thee to be the only
unwedded Mother of our God.
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...”, and make prostrations.
ODE IX
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify
and thee we call blessed.
Preaching throughout the world God, Who entered into fellowship with us
and deified our mortal substance beyond compare, ye freed all from ungodly
delusion; wherefore, ye are ever blessed, О divine apostles. (Twice)
О apostles who depicted the suffering of Christ in your own divers bodily
sufferings, mortify the passions of my flesh and bring to life my soul, which is
ailing, afflicted and dying.
Be Thou the path guiding me who have fallen into the abyss of sin, to the
unerring path of Thy commandments, for I have become lost, having taken evil
paths, and am afflicted, О Lover of mankind.
Theotokion: The choir of the angels and archangels, authorities and powers,
principalities, dominions, cherubim, seraphim and thrones, with the assembly of
the apostles and her who gave birth to Thee, beseech Thee, О only King: Save
Thy servants!
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: О Virgin who received the angel’s salutation * and hast given birth
to thine own Creator, * save those who magnify thee.
О Nicholas, adornment of holy hierarchs and wellspring of miracles, pray to
God the Lover of mankind, that we be granted remission of sins.
As of old thou didst deliver the prisoners from death, so do thou deliver us
from the temptations of life, О Nicholas.
Thou wast buried in Myra of Lycia, О Nicholas, and always pouring forth
myrrh, О Nicholas, ever dispel thou the fetid stench of the passions.
The coming of the Creator is nigh at hand. Be not idle, О my soul, but cry
aloud: Through the prayers of Nicholas, О Christ, save me!
Theotokion: О all-hymned one, who hast given birth to the Savior, enlighten
the blinded eye of my heart, that, saved through thee, I may hymn thee.
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...”, and a prostration.
Litany: Let us complete ..., Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms.
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the apostles, in Tone VI:
Wisely transforming the tempest of demonic delusion into tranquility, О
apostles of Christ, ye guided the whole world to the Orthodox Faith, and pray
now on behalf of our souls.
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons.
О ye faithful, with hymns let us fittingly honor the memory of the most wise
disciples of Christ our King; for in the world they proclaimed faith in the Trinity.
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our
hands do Thou guide aright.
To the Martyrs: Our God hath made wondrous His chosen saints. Rejoice and
be glad, all ye, His servants, in that crowns and His kingdom have been made
ready for you! We beseech you, to not forget us!
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
The recovery of the sorrowful * and the release of the ailing art thou, * O allhymned Theotokos. * Save this city and people, * O pacification of those who are
embattled, * the quietude of the tempest-tossed, ** who alone art the intercession
of the faithful.
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia.
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal.
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE VI
AT LITURGY
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VI:
Remember me, О God my Savior, when Thou shalt come in Thy kingdom,
and save me, in that Thou alone lovest mankind.
Traversing the world like mystical rays, О glorious apostles, with faith ye
enlightened the race of mankind.
О enlightened apostles of the Lord, like clouds ye rained down upon the world
the water of divine knowledge.
To the Martyrs: Approaching the fire of torment, О martyrs, ye received from
God a divine dew which cooled you.
Glory ..., Worshipping the holy and adored Trinity, О ye faithful, let us cry out
together: By the supplications of the apostles, save us all!
Now & ever ..., О Theotokos, who in manner past all telling hast given birth
to the Word Who with the Father is equally without beginning, entreat Him, that
our souls may be saved.
On Thursday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII:
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth,
* and their words unto the ends of the world.
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
proclaimeth the work of His hands.
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, 0 Lord, and
Thy truth in the congregation of saints.
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their
words unto the ends of the world. 