ON WEDNESDAY EVENING: TONE VIII
AT VESPERS
On “Lord, I have cried ...”, 3 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone VIII:
Spec. Mel.: “O Lord, though Thou didst stand ...”:
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness.
О Lord, Thou didst enlighten Thine apostles with the beams of the
Comforter, with the noetic radiance of the knowledge of Thee setting them as
beacons unto the confirmation of the Faith, О Master; wherefore, we bow down
before Thine ineffable love for mankind.
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord.
By the supplications of Thine apostles, О Lord, Thou hast protected this Thy
flock, preserving it unharmed by the temptations of the enemy; for with Thy
precious blood Thou didst redeem it from enslavement to the enemy, in that
Thou art compassionate and the Lover of mankind.
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let
Israel hope in the Lord.
Together ye were shown to be like precious stones set in the foundation of the
Church, with radiant brilliance shining forth upon the whole world the knowledge
of God, О divine apostles, who stand before the Trinity and pray for our souls.
Then the Stichera for the saint, from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these
Stichera for the holy & great wonderworker Nicholas, in Tone VIII:
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities.
О Lord, Thou hast glorified thine honored and holy hierarch Nicholas to the
ends of the earth, imparting to him the grace of miracles; and Thou didst show
him to be the champion of those in grievous misfortunes, and those who have
fallen into tribulations and afflictions, and who ever ask his help.
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.
О Lord, have pity on Thy servants through the divine entreaties of Thy holy
hierarch, and free us from all misfortune, all affliction, and every attack, for with
faith do we bow down before Thine invincible might.
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of
the Lord abideth forever.
Having thee as an intercessor and fervent ally before the Master, О Nicholas,
we flee to thee with faith, and cry: Turn us not away empty of thy protection, but
show that thy loving-kindness extends to thy servants.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Behold the groaning of my contrite heart, * O Bride of God, * and accept, and
reject not, the lifting up of my hands, * O pure and all-immaculate Virgin Mary, *
as thou art full of love for mankind; ** that I may hymn and magnify thee who
hast exalted our race.
Then, “О Joyous Light ...”, the Prokeimenon in Tone V:
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do
Thou judge me.
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my
mouth.
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then:
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the apostles, in Tone VIII:
Fervently loving Thee on earth, О Lord, Thine apostles considered all to be
but dung, that they might acquire Thee alone; and they gave their bodies over to
wounds for Thee; wherefore, glorified, they pray for our souls.
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in
heaven, Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress,
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us.
О Lord, Thou didst magnify the memory of the apostles on earth, for
assembling them together, we all glorify Thee; since by their prayers and for their
sake, Thou dost grant healings, peace and great mercy to the whole world.
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.
To the Martyrs: What virtue, what praise is due the saints? For they bowed
their heads beneath the sword for the sake of Thee Who bowed down the
heavens and descended; they shed their blood for Thee Who emptied Thyself and
assumed the form of a servant; they humbled themselves even unto death, emulating Thy poverty. By their prayers, О God, have mercy upon us in the multitude of
Thy compassions.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
I flee to thy protection, O holy Virgin Theotokos, * for I know that through
thee I shall obtain salvation; ** for thou art able to help me, O pure one.
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion through Our
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal.
ON WEDNESDAY NIGHT: TONE VIII
AT COMPLINE
Canon of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos
ODE I
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea
in the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, *
while it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a
hymn unto God.
In a manner transcending nature, О Virgin Theotokos, thou hast given birth
to God the Word incarnate, Who before was incorporeal, yet came to dwell in the
world as God and man; wherefore, we all glorify thee who, after God, art our sure
help.
Arrayed in a vesture of many colors, О blessed one who art full of the grace of
God, in a manner transcending understanding and all telling thou hast given birth
to the Word of the Father, Who became flesh in His ineffable loving-kindness;
and thou didst remain an undefiled virgin.
Glory ..., From a royal root thou didst put forth Christ the King, the Word of
God, in a manner transcending understanding and comprehension, О pure one,
and hast given birth to Him, incarnate from thy pure blood, revealed in two
natures, but in a single Hypostasis.
Now & ever ..., He who proclaimeth thee the Theotokos, О most pure one,
prevaileth over every heresy; wherefore, О Birthgiver of God, having given birth
unto the eternal Word of God Who immutably became flesh, thou art higher than
all creation.
ODE III
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou Who
in the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and
didst establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save
Thee, O only Lover of mankind.
God made His abode within thy holy womb, О Mother of God, and became
incarnate in a manner He Himself knew, and hath saved us by His life-bearing
sufferings; wherefore, we glorify thee as the portal of salvation.
The Supremely divine One, Who hath breathed the spirit (of life) into all,
became incarnate on earth and dwelt with mankind, having been produced by thy
womb seedlessly; wherefore, all of us, the faithful, bless thee with hymns, О pure
one.
Glory ..., Having conceived in thy womb Him Who was begotten of the
Father before all ages, О Virgin, without knowing a man, thou hast given birth for
us to Him as both God and man, perfect and indivisible in both natures.
Now & ever ..., О pure and divinely blessed Virgin, we all know thee to be the
rod which budded forth Christ, the Flower of incorruption, and the golden censer
who bore the burning Coal of the divine Essence in thine arms.
ODE IV
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art
my God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom
of Thy Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet
Habbakuk I cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’
Of old the ark which received the divinely written law prefigured the lifecreating Word Who was ineffably conceived within thy womb, О most
immaculate one, richly nourishing the souls of those who chant: Glory to Thy
power, О Lover of mankind!
Thou alone wast the true source of salvation, О Mother of God, who through
thine all-pure blood gave flesh to the Creator and Fashioner, and through whom
the gates of death have been broken down and life given to us.
Glory ..., That in the richness of thy goodness Thou mightest seek out Thine
image which was buried by the passions, Thou didst make Thine abode within the
Virgin’s womb, and Thou, the Wisdom of God, didst make a temple from her;
and having thereby come to dwell among mankind, О Compassionate One, Thou
hast saved the ends of the world.
Now & ever ..., After God it is thee whom we have acquired as an intercessor,
О most immaculate one; for thou wast the Mother of God the Creator and
Fashioner, Who took upon Himself our form, saved it from corruption and
tribulations, and glorified it with divine glory.
ODE V
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me *
and why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? *
But do Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards
the light of Thy commandments.
The generations of all mankind bless thee as the one who gave birth to the
Creator, Fashioner and Lord, О most pure one, and the noetic leaders of the
incorporeal hosts glorify thee as the Mother of God.
The armies of the hosts on high bless thee, О most pure one; for through thee
alone we on earth have been united to those in heaven, wherefore we hymn thy
birthgiving.
Glory ..., In an ineffable manner, О Virgin, He Who alone is compassionate,
the Word Who shone forth from the Father before all ages, made His abode
within thee and become a man, delivering us from corruption and leading us up to
a life of incorruption.
Now & ever ..., Thou wast clothed with the beauties of virginity, О most pure
Virgin, and hast done away with the nakedness of the first Eve, having given birth
to Christ Who bestoweth the vesture of incorruption upon those who hymn thee.
ODE VI
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and
Thou hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.
He Who upholdeth all things with His omnipotent power arrayed Himself in
the weakness of the flesh through thee, О all-immaculate Virgin, for the good of
mankind, in that He is the Lover of mankind.
The all-accomplishing Spirit descended upon thee, О all-immaculate one, and
the Word, of God made His abode within thee and ineffably assumed flesh,
though He remained immutable.
Glory ..., Illumine the souls of those who hymn thee in an Orthodox manner,
О Bride of God, for the sayings of the prophets proclaimed beforehand thy most
pure conception and birthgiving, which are beyond all telling.
Now & ever ..., We piously hymn the most pure Mary, the truly divine and
honored dwelling-place of God; for she contained God, receiving Him Who is
infinite and unapproachable.
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII:
As the all-immaculate Bride of the Creator, * Mother of the Redeemer, who
knewest not a man, * and as the receptacle of the Comforter O all-hymned one, *
hasten thou to deliver me, * the vile abode of iniquity and noetic plaything of the
demons, * from their evil machinations; * and make me the bright dwelling-place
of the virtues, * O thou incorrupt light-bearing one. * Drive away the clouds of
the passions and grant that, * by thy supplications, * I may receive a portion on
high ** and share in the never-waning light. 
ODE VII
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God's condescension; *
for which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in
a meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!
О most pure Lady who conceived the Redeemer of all, grant ineffable and
divine deliverance unto me who cry aloud and sing: Blessed is the God of our
fathers!
Now have all things been filled with divine light through thee, О most pure
one; for thou hast been revealed to be the door through which God held
converse, enlightening those who cry out with faith: Blessed is the God of our
fathers!
Glory ..., Lo! the divine prophecy of the godly David hath now been fulfilled:
They who have acquired the riches of grace truly entreat thy countenance, О pure
Birthgiver of God, and now bless the God of our fathers.
Now & ever ..., О most pure one, thou didst conceive Him Who is God and
Lord over all, Whose good pleasure it was to save the race of mankind from death
and corruption; and hymning Him as is meet, we cry aloud: Blessed is the God of
our fathers!
ODE VIII
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant
and the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore
they cried aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!
Cleanse thou the wounds of my soul and the stripes of my sins, О blessed, and
most pure Maiden, who from thy virginal womb which knew not wedlock gave
birth to Him Who is God over all. Him do the children bless and supremely exalt,
throughout the ages.
Resplendent with the beauties of virginity, thou didst become the receptacle of
the never-waning Light, О all-pure one, enlightening those who with all their soul
confess thee to be the true Theotokos, and who cry aloud: Ye children bless; ye
priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!
Glory ..., Sanctified by the Holy Spirit, О all-immaculate Theotokos, thou didst
truly receive in thy womb the beginningless Son Who with the Father is equally
eternal, Who became incarnate within thee, О pure one, for the benefit of those
who cry out with faith: Ye children bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, supremely
exalt Him throughout the ages!
Now & ever ..., In that thou hast given birth to God in a manner past all
telling and understanding, О most pure Mother of God, Him do thou beseech,
that all of us who are unworthy may be treated with lenience by Him at the time
of His awesome and dread coming, when He shall discern the nature of all who
with fear will stand naked before Him and be judged.
ODE IX
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were
filled with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy
womb was rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the
ranks of men and of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.
All of us who have rejected eternal life and have fallen, accursed, into death
thou hast called again, О most pure Mother of the Redeemer, and hast granted
them to hasten to our former homeland; wherefore, О Mother of God, we
unceasingly magnify thee.
Readily grant that I may pass over the waves of the perils of this life and its
present sufferings, О Theotokos, stilling them, in that thou art good, and guiding
me to the virtues of the way of heaven, that I may unceasingly magnify thee as my
benefactress.
Glory ..., О pure and most glorious Mother of God, save those who hymn
thee with love from all perils, mercifully subduing our turmoil, in that thou hast
given birth unto God; for thou canst freely do all that thou dost desire, О Virgin.
Wherefore, we all magnify thee.
Now & ever ..., The honored Church which Christ thy Son hath acquired with
His precious blood, and hath saved from misfortunes and the violence which
assails us, in that He is good, do thou show forth as victorious over budding
heresy, О joyous Lady.
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and Trisagion through Our Father ..., Troparion, and
the rest as usual. Dismissal.
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE VIII
AT MATINS
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,
The Sessional hymns of the apostles, in Tone VIII:
Let us hymn the divine disciples of our God, who as beacons for the world
and guides to our salvation, from the beginning shone forth upon us who were in
darkness, and proclaimed to all the Sun of righteousness. And preaching the
Trinity in a single Godhead, they cast down the falsehood of idolatry. Wherefore,
we beseech you, О apostles: Entreat Christ God, that He grant us remission of
sins and great mercy.
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words
unto the ends of the world.
Your most wise sound, which truly went forth unto all the ends of the earth, О
most lauded apostles of the Lord, manifestly proclaimed the knowledge of God
unto all, transformed heathen ignorance into understanding; wherefore, dispelling
the darkness of idolatry, it shone forth the light of knowledge upon those in
darkness. For this cause we pray: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of
sins unto those who with love honor your holy memory.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Having fallen into subtle temptations by enemies, visible and invisible, I am
beset by the tempest of my countless sins, О most holy one, and I flee to the
haven of thy goodness as to a fervent help and protection. Wherefore, besech
Him Who became incarnate of thee without seed, О most pure one, on behalf of
all thy servants who unceasingly hymn thee, О all-pure Theotokos, and earnestly
beseech Him, that He grant remission offenses unto those who with faith bow
down before thy birthgiving.
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone VIII:
The sound of the most wise apostles went forth unto all the earth, as said the
prophet; for preaching the Word, they enlightened all the nations; wherefore,
praising them with hymns, we honor them as is meet, for they ever entreat Christ
that our souls be saved.
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament
proclaimeth the work of His hands.
Receiving the commandments of the Lord in their souls with faith, like a rich
treasury, the apostles showed themselves to all as benefactors, dispelling the
poverty of the demons and enriching all with divine wealth. To them let us all cry
aloud: With works of the virtues enrich us also, who are now impoverished, we
pray.
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.
To the Martyrs: Mortifying the fiery form and movements of the passions with
temperance, the martyrs received the grace of Christ, to drive infirmities from the
sick, and to work miracles, in that they live even after death. О what a truly most
glorious wonder it is that bare bones pour forth healings! Glory to the one most
wise Creator and God!
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
О Virgin Birthgiver of God, intercessor for the faithful, joy of the sorrowful,
and great consolation of those who weep: With the holy apostles unceasingly
entreat on our behalf, Him Who was supra-naturally born from thine all-holy
womb, that He deliver us at the hour of trial from grievous condemnation.
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns, in Tone VIII:
Spec. Mel.: “Pondering what was mystically commanded ...”:
Ye were shown to be radiant beacons ever enlightening the whole earth and
dispelling the darkness of polytheism with the light of piety through your
teachings, О ye who beheld Christ with your own eyes; wherefore, by your holy
prayers enlighten me also, who am in the darkness of the passions, that I may walk
without fear, О God-bearing apostles.
Trawling for reason-endowed fish with the net of divine words, ye brought the
first-fruits thereof to our God; and loving the wounds of Christ, ye arrayed
yourselves therein, and showed yourselves to be emulators of His sufferings.
Wherefore, assembling as is meet, we now celebrate your festival, О glorious
apostles, and cry out together: Entreat Christ God, that remission of sins be
granted to those who with love honor your holy memory.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
The Son and Word of God whom nothing can contain, * in a manner beyond
all telling and understanding * was born from thee, O Theotokos. * With the
apostles do thou pray unto Him, * that He bestow true peace upon the Ecumene
* and grant unto us before the end forgiveness of sins, * and in His extreme
goodness ** deem thy servants worthy of the heavenly Kingdom.
ODE I
Canon of the holy, glorious and all-praised apostles, the composition of
Theophanes, in Tone VIII:
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto
our God and Redeemer let us sing.
О radiant choir of the apostles who stand before the great Light, illumine my
darkened heart, and guide me to the paths of salvation. (Twice)
О true friends of the Redeemer, from the love of the passions deliver me who
have been beguiled by the many deceits of life and am covered by the night of
ignorance.
As arrows of the Mighty One, О divine apostles, with your keen blades cure
those wounded by the evil one, who flee under your protection with faith.
Theotokion: Full of divine majesty, the Fruit of thy womb issueth forth, О
pure Mother, saving those beguiled by the malice of the serpent.
Another canon, of the holy wonderworker Nicholas, in Tone VIII:
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, *
for gloriously hath He been glorified!
Standing before the King of all with the choirs of the heavenly hosts, О
blessed Nicholas, from every evil temptation save us on earth who ever call upon
thee; and ask release from our transgressions.
Enriched by thee, our intercessor, О Nicholas, we cry out to thee with faith
day and night: Go now before us who are greatly afflicted by the wicked attacks of
the demons and corrupt men, that, finding tranquility, we may praise thee.
With the mighty cords of thy prayers, О Nicholas, give over to utter
suffocation those who seek to strangle us, from their wicked assault delivering us
who cry out in praise: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been
glorified!
Theotokion: In a manner transcending the laws of nature thou hast given birth
to God the Bestower of the law, Who became a man. As thou art good, О allimmaculate one, entreat Him to overlook the iniquities of us who ever cry out: Let
us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!
ODE III
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou
art the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee.
О apostles of the Savior, with power ye gird about my heart, which hath been
weakened by evil thoughts and the passions. (Twice)
Proclaiming the one, Thrice-holy effulgence of God, the disciples dissipated
the gloom of polytheism.
As divine physicians and surgeons, treat ye the evil sores of my heart, О
disciples of our God.
Theotokion: Save me, О pure Lady who supra-naturally hast given birth to the
Redeemer, Master, Savior and Lord of all.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: Same as the foregoing.
That we may honor and hymn thee always, grant us a helping hand, О holy
hierarch Nicholas.
By thine unsleeping prayers, О Nicholas, lull to sleep the perils which arise
before us, we beseech thee.
By thy mediation, О holy Nicholas, deliver me who am wholly imperiled by
the passions and the temptations of wicked men.
Theotokion: О pure one, entreat the Redeemer, that He grant me release from
my sins and the cruel dangers of life.
ODE IV
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity.
Ye have been adorned, О glorious apostles, arrayed in divine splendors and
enlightened by the rays of Him Who showed you to be luminaries. (Twice)
О helmsmen of all, ye divine apostles, from every tempest deliver me who am
imperiled upon the deep and am shaken by the dangers of life.
Roiling the sea of polytheism, О divinely chosen steeds, with your
supplications ye overwhelm the deep of my transgressions.
Theotokion: In thy womb thou gavest flesh to the Word Who is equal in
activity to the Father, О Virgin; wherefore, thou hast been revealed to transcend
all creation, О Lady.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: Same as the foregoing.
Because of the multitude of my transgressions I fall into many and countless
tribulations. Make haste to help me, О holy Nicholas, emulating the Benefactor.
Living in slothfulness, I weep over myself, who am perishing. By thy prayers,
О Nicholas, guide me to repentance.
О father Nicholas, who delivered the three youths who were to be executed,
deliver me from all oppression and from everlasting condemnation.
Theotokion: О most pure one, strengthen me to entertain heavenly thoughts,
guiding the movements of my soul to the entries of life.
ODE V
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our
God, * and we know none other besides Thee.
As helmsmen, О apostles, to the broad expanse of salvation guide me who am
hemmed in by many transgressions. (Twice)
О apostles who beheld God with your own eyes, from every dishonorable act
deliver me, who honor your all-honorable council, I pray.
In that ye emulated the sufferings of the Savior, О holy apostles, drive all
passion for luxury from my soul.
Theotokion: Cure my sick soul, О most pure Lady who hast given birth to
Him Who taketh away the infirmities of all.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: Same as the foregoing.
By thy prayers, О divinely blessed Nicholas, strengthen us to keep the
commandments of Christ, our one God.
Having lived in Myra, О Nicholas, with divine fragrance fill us who piously
hymn thee.
Have pity on us By thy prayers, О holy hierarch Nicholas, entreating the most
compassionate God, that we be delivered from misfortunes and tribulations.
Theotokion: О Maiden full of the waters of life, give drink to all of us who
hymn thee with pious mind.
ODE VI
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I
proclaim my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto
Hades hath drawn nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up
from corruption, O God.
Ye cast down the temples of the idols, which shook at the sound of your
supplications, О disciples of Christ. And I pray with faith: Break ye the idols of
my mind, and show me to be a temple of God, though I am guilty of many sins.
(Twice)
О chosen ones who beheld God, and who like stones were founded upon the
immovable Rock, save my heart, which hath foolishly been founded upon the
sand; for the rivers rage dangerously and buffet me cruelly.
О friends of Christ, from the beguiling love of the flesh deliver me, who have
shown myself to be vile by my great evil; and bind me to the love of Him Who
loveth sinners in the great mercy of remission.
Theotokion: The Creator, choosing thee, О Maiden, as a rose, as a most pure
lily, as an aroma of sweet fragrance, from the beautiful vales of the world, and
making His abode in thy womb, and being born from thee, hath filled all things
with sweet savor.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: Same as the foregoing.
Thy heart, О Nicholas, was like paradise, having Christ the Redeemer within it
like the tree of life. Him do thou unceasingly entreat, that He make us all dwellers
in paradise, enriched by thee, our fervent helper.
I pass my life in slothfulness, and sin without fear, wretch that I am; but
pondering the trial to come, which cannot be postponed, I am seized with fear.
Have pity on me, О God, through the supplications of Nicholas, in that Thou art
compassionate.
When the tempest of many and varied temptations suddenly assails me
because of the multitude of mine offenses, I cry out: Leave me not bereft of help,
О blessed one, but as thou art merciful extend to me a helping hand, and save me.
Theotokion: Thou wast the palace and fiery throne of the Most High King, О
Virgin, who art more exalted than the cherubim and seraphim. Wherefore, every
breath glorifies thee as the Mother of the Creator.
ODE VII
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the
flames, * changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou,
O Lord our God, throughout the ages'.
The night of slothfulness holds me, and the darkness of sin covers me. О
most wise apostles, who were shown to be the light of the world, hasten ye to
illumine my darkened heart. (Twice)
О divinely eloquent ones, who were shown to be another heaven declaring the
glory of our God, from the indignity of the passions deliver those who with faith
have recourse to your mighty protection.
О apostles, who were shown to be burning coals alight with the fire of the
Comforter, utterly consume all the tinder of our malice, and forever deliver us
from, the unquenchable fire.
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be a mountain overshadowed and
unquarried, from whence the Stone was cut; wherefore, О Lady, grant
compunction to my darkened soul, which hath been hardened by the bitter love of
pleasures.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: Same as the foregoing.
Thou didst pour forth streams of doctrine, drying up the torrents of heresies
and giving abundant drink to the souls of the faithful, О sacred minister Nicholas;
wherefore, we honor thee.
Enabled by the power of the Trinity, thou didst receive the strength to destroy
false graven images; wherefore, I entreat thee with faith, О Father: Drive out the
passionate idols of my mind.
Thou wast the primate of the people of Myra, and even after death pourest
forth divine myrrh, О most blessed Nicholas, dispelling the fetid ailments of us
who approach thee with faith.
Theotokion: Thou didst stop the flow of death, О thou who hast given birth
to God immortal. Him do thou beseech, О pure one, that He mortify the passions
of my lowly body, and grant me life.
ODE VIII
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with
heat fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that
they had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely
exalt Him throughout all ages’.
Strengthen my soul, which is whirled about by the passions, О ye who are the
unbreakable foundations and unshakable pillars of the Church, the bulwark of the
faithful, who draw out those who are in the depths of perdition, the right calm
harbors of those who chant with faith: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye
people supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! (Twice)
О disciples of the Savior, by your supplications raise me up who am in the
grave of dark despair and lie in the netherworld, having fallen through pleasures.
Have pity, О apostles who beheld God, for ye have manifestly been deemed
worthy to be enriched with the Teacher’s compassion throughout all ages. (Twice)
Theotokion: As thou wast revealed to be splendid in the beauties of virtue, О
all-pure one, within thy womb thou didst contain the beautifying majesty of the
Creator of all. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He may throughout all ages
majestically enlighten my soul, which is stuck fast in the sins of the passions, but
seeketh its ancient beauty, О pure one.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely
eloquent children sang: * 'Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord'.
Enlightened by the radiant beams of the three-Sunned Godhead, О divinely
wise and holy hierarch Nicholas, By thy prayers dispel the darkness of my
passions.
О Nicholas, initiate of the sacred mysteries, who delivered the three generals
from death by thine awesome appearance, deliver us also from all deadly harm.
By thy prayers, О most blessed Nicholas, make steadfast those who are beset
by the temptations of the demons and oppressive men, and save us unharmed.
Theotokion: Bring entreaty to the Lord, that He have pity and save those who
have recourse to thee with faith, О all-holy Virgin, our helper.
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...”, and make prostrations.
ODE IX
Canon of the Apostles
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were
filled with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy
womb was rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the
ranks of men and of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.
With the power of God ye broke the jaws of the soul-destroying lions, О
apostles, for ye were ordained by Christ to be princes on earth, piously submitting
in hymnody to this Spirit; wherefore, make the disorderly movements of my heart
subject to the laws of God.
Preaching the Word of God, Who is more comely than all the sons of
mankind, and Who appeared in the world, ye made beautiful your feet, as ones
proclaiming peace and life; wherefore, by your prayers bring peace to my soul,
which is troubled by the passions.
Having mortified your members on earth, ye clothed yourselves in all life,
emulating the honored Passion by your sufferings; wherefore, О divinely blessed
apostles, with the remedy of true repentance give life to me who have been
wounded by the darts of the evil one’s malice.
Theotokion: In that thou art merciful, О thou who hast given birth to the
supremely good God, heal my soul, which hath become sick through grievous
passions; and ever deliver me from enemies who goad and attack me, О most
pure one, that, saved, I may diligently magnify thee, whom our generation hath
magnified.
Canon of Saint Nicholas
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do
we magnify.
As thou art the deliverer of those who with faith pray to thee in their sorrow,
О Nicholas, deliver me from all malice, entreating the Lord God in prayer.
О most holy father Nicholas, who art now with the heavenly choirs, beseech
the good God, that He save us.
Judgment is at the gates! Be watchful, О my soul, and cry out to God the
Judge: Through the prayers of Nicholas save me, О Lord!
Theotokion: As the receptacle of the Light, О Virgin, enlighten my soul, which
hath been darkened by the passions, that I may ever glorify thee with faith and
love.
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...”, and a prostration.
Litany: Let us complete ..., Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms.
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the apostles, in Tone VIII:
Fervently loving Thee on earth, О Lord, Thine apostles considered all to be
but dung, that they might acquire Thee alone; and they gave their bodies over to
wounds for Thee; wherefore, glorified, they pray for our souls.
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons.
О Lord, Thou didst magnify the memory of the apostles on earth, for
assembling together thereon, we all glorify Thee; since for their sake Thou hast
granted healings, peace and great mercy to the whole world by their prayers.
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our
hands do Thou guide aright.
To the Martyrs: Arrayed well in the breastplate of the Faith, having armed
yourselves with the Cross as a sword, ye showed yourselves to be mighty warriors,
manfully opposed the tyrants, and cast down the deception of the devil; and,
victorious, ye were granted crowns. Pray ye ever on our behalf, that our souls be
saved.
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Theotokion:
Rescue me, O lady, * from the hands of the man-slaying serpent, * who
wickedly desireth to devour me utterly. * Crush thou his jaws, I pray thee, * and
set at naught his wiles, ** that, delivered from his talons, I may magnify thine aid.
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia.
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal.
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE VIII
AT LITURGY
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VIII:
Remember us, О Christ, Savior of the world, as Thou didst remember the
thief on the tree; and grant unto all Thy heavenly kingdom, О only
Compassionate One.
Like trumpets, О apostles of Christ, ye wakened those lying in the graves of
ungodliness and brought them to share in the divine life.
With the mystic seed of the Word, О divinely eloquent ones, ye rendered the
barren hearts of all the nations fruitful with divine understanding; wherefore, ye
are fittingly called blessed.
To the Martyrs: Having stripped yourselves of all evil, ye strode forth valiantly
in the midst of evil men, and clothed yourselves in the robe of salvation from
heaven, О spiritual athletes.
Glory ..., By the supplications of Thy divine apostles mortify the uprisings of
the evil passions of my wretched soul, О adored and all-holy Trinity, that, saved, I
may glorify Thee.
Now & ever ..., Rejoice, tongs of the divine Coal! Rejoice, seal of the prophets
and teaching of the apostles, О most pure Theotokos, because of whom we have
been freed from corruption!
On Thursday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII:
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth,
* and their words unto the ends of the world.
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
proclaimeth the work of His hands.
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, 0 Lord, and
Thy truth in the congregation of saints.
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their
words unto the ends of the world. 