SUNDAY OF THE PUBLICAN AND THE PHARISEE
AT VESPERS
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 7 Resurrection Stichera.
Then 3 Stichera from the Triodion, in Tone I
Brethren, let us not pray like the Pharisee: * for he who exalts himself shall
be humbled. * Let us humble ourselves before God, * and with fasting cry aloud
as did the Publican: * O God be merciful to us sinners. (Twice)
The Pharisee, overcome with vainglory, * and the Publican, bowed down in
repentance, * approached Thee the only Master. * The one boasted and was
deprived of blessings, * while the other kept silent and was found worthy of gifts.
* Confirm me, O Christ God, * in these his cries of sorrow, * for Thou art the
Lover of mankind.
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:
Almighty Lord, I know how great is the power of tears. * For they led
Hezekiah from the gates of death; * they delivered the sinful woman from the
transgressions of many years; * they justified the Publican more than the
Pharisee. ** And with all these I also pray: “Have mercy on me”.
Now & Ever ..., the Dogmatic Theotokion, in the Tone of the week.
After the entrance, “O Joyous Light ...”:
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...”, with its verses.
The Resurrection Aposticha from the Tone of the week, then:
Glory from the Triodion ..., in Tone V:
Mine eyes are weighed down by my transgressions, * and I cannot raise
them on high, and see the height of heaven. * But receive me O Savior, for like
the Publican I repent, ** and have mercy on me.
Now & ever ..., in Tone V:
Thou art the temple and portal, * the palace and throne of the King, * O
most honored Virgin, * through whom Christ the Lord, my Redeemer, * Who is
the Sun of righteousness, * hath revealed Himself unto those who sleep in
darkness, * deigning to enlighten those * whom He hath fashioned in His image
by His own hand. * Wherefore, O all-hymned one, * as thou hast acquired a
mother’s boldness before Him, ** entreat Him without ceasing, that our souls be
saved.
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”, Trisagion. Then: 
In Tone IV:
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb,
** for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice)
Blessed be the Name of the Lord etc.
AT MATINS
On “God is the Lord ...,” the usual Troparia, in the Tone of the week:
After the 1st and 2nd
(THE EVLOGITARIA)
readings from the Psalter, The Sessional hymns of the
Resurrection, in the Tone of the week: Then the Resurrectional Verses:
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes; and the rest.
Then the small Litany and the Sessional Hymn, in the Tone of the week.
The Hymns of Ascent, and Prokeimenon, in the Tone of the week: Let
every breath ..., The Sunday Resurrection Gospel.
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ etc.
Psalm 50. Then the following penitential hymns, in Tone VIII:
Glory ..., The gates of repentance, do Thou open unto me, O Giver of Life,
* for early in the morning my spirit seeketh Thy holy temple, * bearing the
temple of my body all defiled. * But as One who art compassionate ** cleanse it
by Thy loving-kindness and mercy.
Now & ever ..., Guide me on the paths of salvation, O Theotokos: * for I
have polluted my soul with shameful deeds * and wasted all my life in
slothfulness. ** but by thine intercessions * do thou deliver me from all impurity.
In Tone VI:
Have mercy upon me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy: * and
according to the multitude of Thy compassion * blot out my transgressions.
In Tone VIII As I the wretched one ponder the multitude of evil deeds I
have done, * I tremble for fear of the dread day of judgment. * But trusting in
Thy compassionate mercy, * like David do I cry unto Thee: ** “Have mercy
upon me, O God, according to Thy great mercy”.
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...”, and the Canons:
ODE I
The appointed Canons from the Oktoechos. Then:
The Canon from the Triodion:
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing
their pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song
of victory.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
By parables Christ hath led all mankind to a life of amendment: Raising up
the Publican from humbleness, he showed the Pharisee who exalted himself to
be humbled.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
From humility cometh an exalted honor, but from pride we see a grievous
fall; let us, then, strive to emulate the good actions of the Publican, and hate the
evil ones of the Pharisee.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
Every good deed is rendered useless through pride, while every evil is
cleansed by humility. Wherefore, let us in faith embrace humility, and utterly
abhor the ways of vainglory.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
The King of all, wishing His own disciples to be humble-minded, taught
them to emulate the sighing of the Publican and his humility.
Glory ..., I groan as did the Publican, and with never-silent lamentations O
Lord I now draw near to Thy loving compassion, do Thou be merciful to me
who doth now pass through life in humility.
Now & ever ..., O lady, I dedicate to thee my understanding and my counsel,
my expectation, my body, soul and spirit. From grievous adversaries and
temptations, and from every threat to come, do thou deliver and save me.
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and
utter discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping
festival, * joyfully praising her wonders.
ODE III
The appointed Canons from the Oktoechos. Then:
The Canon from the Triodion:
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast
exalted the horn of The faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon
the rock * of Thy confession.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
From the dung-hill of the passions the humble are lifted up on high, while
from the height of the virtues the high-minded suffer a grievous fall: let us flee
such an image of wickedness.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
Vainglory doth nullify the riches of righteousness, whereas humility
scattereth a multitude of passions; bestowing this upon us, show us to be like the
Publican O Savior.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Like the Publican let us also beat our breasts and cry out in compunction,
“O God cleanse us sinners,” that like him we may receive forgiveness.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
Zealously, O ye faithful, let us increase in meekness, and with humility let us
live out the days of our lives in suffering of the heart, weeping and prayer, that
we may receive forgiveness from God.
Glory ..., Let us cast away, ye faithful, the high-minded boasting and hurtful
pride of the Pharisee, and his most wicked, repugnant to God, malice.
Now & ever ..., In thee, my only refuge, have I set my trust: let me not fall
away from my good hope, but grant me thy protection, O pure One, and deliver
me from every evil snare of my wicked enemies.
Katavasia: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in
spiritual fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine
glory * grant them crowns of glory.
Sessional Hymns from the Triodion, in Tone IV:
Humility exalted the Publican who was overcome with shame at his evil
deeds, * when he cried to the Creator, “Be merciful:” * but exaltation brought
down from righteousness the wretched Pharisee who spoke boastfully. *
Therefore let us earnestly desire that which is good ** and avoid that which is
evil.
Glory ..., Of old humility exalted the Publican * who cried aloud with tears,
* “Be merciful,” and he was justified. * Let us all follow his example, * for we
have fallen into the depths of evil. * Let us cry to the Savior from the depths of
our hearts: ** We have sinned, be merciful, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.
Now & ever ..., Be swift to receive our prayers, O Lady, * and bring them to
thy Son and God, all-immaculate Sovereign Lady. * Deliver from tribulations
those who flee to thee. * Destroy the wiles and subdue the arrogance ** of those
who godlessly war against thy servants, O most pure One.
ODE IV
The appointed Canons from the Oktoechos. Then:
The Canon from the Triodion:
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church
divinely singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
The Word, set an example showing that the path to exaltation is humility,
having humbled Himself even unto taking the form of a servant, thereby
instructing all, that he who humbleth himself shall be exalted on high. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
The righteous Pharisee exalted himself and fell, wickedly rejecting humility,
but through humility the Publican was exalted and justified.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
He who was without need of virtue was deprived of them, and shown to be
foolish. Yet the riches of humility justified him who was in most need of them,
whose humility let us emulate.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
O Lord, Thou didst forewarn all that Thou dost resist the high-minded, but
grantest Thy grace to the humble. O savior send down now Thy grace upon us,
for we have humbled ourselves.
Glory ..., The Savior and Master, ever leading us to blessed exaltation, hath
shown us that it is humility that raises one on high, for with His own hands He
didst wash the feet of the disciples.
Now & ever ..., O Virgin, who hast given birth to the unapproachable Light,
by thy light-giving effulgence disperse the darkness of my soul, and taking me by
the hand, guide my life into the path of salvation.
Katavasia: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, *
Jesus the true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands
he hath saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ.
ODE V
The appointed Canons from the Oktoechos. Then:
The Canon from the Triodion:
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of
those who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee,
O Word of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of
sin.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
Let us make haste to follow the Pharisee in his virtues and to emulate the
Publican in his humility, and let us hate what is wrong in each of them: foolish
opinion and the fall into self-destruction.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
The righteousness of the Pharisee proved to be vain and was condemned,
for it was yoked to prideful opinion; However the Publican became a cocompanion of humility, the virtue which exalts one on high. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
The Pharisee thought to drive swiftly in the chariot of the virtues; but the
Publican outran him on foot, for he had yoked humility to compassion.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
Pondering with our minds the parable of the Publican, let us all emulate him
with tears, offering to God a contrite spirit, seeking the remission of our sins.
Glory ..., Let us cast far away the wicked haughtiness and boasting of the
Pharisee, that we may not be stripped of divine grace.
Now & ever ..., A staff of strength grant unto all, O good one, who flee
unto thee, grant them victory in the midst of all enemies and deliver them from
every evil circumstance.
Katavasia: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O
Virgin who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the
God of all, * and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon
all who hymn thee.
ODE VI
The appointed Canons from the Oktoechos. Then:
The Canon from the Triodion:
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, *
I run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from
corruption, * O Most Merciful One.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
The Publican along with the Pharisee ran the race of life, but the one was
overcome by high-mindedness and shipwrecked, while the other was saved by
humility.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
Changing to a humble course of life, let us emulate the fervent wisdom of
the Publican and flee the deadening conceit of the Pharisee; and we shall live.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
Let us fervently follow the ways of Jesus the Savior and His humility, if we
desire to reach the tabernacle of everlasting joy and to dwell in the land of the
living.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Master, Thou hast shown to Thy disciples the humility that raiseth men
on high, for girding Thy loins with a towel, and washing their feet Thou didst
prepare them to follow Thine example.
Glory ..., The Pharisee passed his life in virtue and the Publican in sin; but
the former was brought low by his pride, while the latter was raised on high by
his humble-mindedness.
Now & ever ..., I was formed naked in innocence and simplicity; but the
enemy hath clothed me in the raiment of transgressions and the grossness of the
flesh. But by thine intercessions, O Maiden, I have been saved.
Katavasia: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God
* O ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God
who was born of her.
Kontakion from the Triodion, in Tone IV
Let us flee from the proud-speaking of the Pharisee * and learn from the
Publican the loftiness of words of humility, * and with penitential lamentation let
us cry aloud: “O Savior of the world ** be merciful to us, and cleanse us Thy
servants’.
Ikos : Let us all humble ourselves, brethren; sighing and lamenting, beating
our conscience, that at the eternal judgment we may be numbered with the
faithful and the righteous, and receive forgiveness. Let us pray that we behold the
place truly peaceful, where there is neither pain, nor sorrow, nor sighing from the
soul, in the wondrous Eden fashioned by Christ, for He is God coeternal with
the Father.
SYNAXARION READING:
With God, on this present day we begin the Triodion, the hymns of which
were composed by many of our holy and God-bearing Fathers, inspired by the
Holy Spirit according to their worthiness. The first of all was the great author
Cosmas of Maiuma, who composed the three odes (symbolic of the Holy and
Life-Creating Trinity) for the Great and Holy Week of the Passion of our Lord
and God and Savior Jesus Christ. After him others of the Fathers, including
Theodore and Joseph of the Studite Monastery, following his zealous example,
arranged the services of the other weeks of the Holy and Great Forty-day Fast,
reserving them at first for the use of the Studite Monastery. Furthermore they
composed and arranged hymns, seeking them and collecting them from other
books of the Fathers. Since, according to the Triodion, Sunday, the celebration
of the Resurrection, is the first day of the week as well as the last or eighth day,
they prescribed the first ODE of the canon to be sung on the second day of the 
week, i.e. Monday. The second ODE was prescribed for Tuesday, the third day
of the week, the third ODE for Wednesday, the fourth ODE for Thursday, the
fifth ODE for Friday, and the sixth and seventh ODES for Saturday. The rest,
the eighth and ninth ODES, are prescribed for every day. It must be known,
however, that although it is called the Triodion, it does have services with other
than three-ODE canons. It is so named because the majority of the services have
three ODE canons, especially during Holy Week. For it was our Holy Fathers’
idea that through the entire Triodion would be commemorated in a concise form
all God’s benefits to us from the beginning, using it as a reminder for all of us
that we were created by Him, and were exiled from Paradise through the tasting
of the fruit, rejecting the commandment that was given to us for our knowledge,
and we were cast out through the envy of the arch villain serpent and enemy,
who was made to crawl for his arrogance. That we remained cut off from the
benefits of Paradise and were led by the devil. That the Son and Word of God,
having suffered in His mercy, bowing the heavens, descended and made His
abode in the Virgin and became man for our sake, showing us through His life
the ascent into the heavens, through humility first of all then fasting and the
rejection of evil and through His other deeds. That He suffered and rose from
the dead and ascended once more into heaven, and He sent down the Holy Spirit
upon His holy disciples and Apostles, who all proclaimed Him to be the Son of
God and the most perfect God. And that once more the divine Apostles acted
through the grace of the most Holy Spirit and gathered all the saints from the
ends of the earth through their preaching, filling the world on high, which was
the intention of the Creator from the beginning. Now the purpose of the
Triodion intended by the Holy Fathers on these three present feasts of the
Publican and the Pharisee, the Prodigal Son, and the Second Coming is a kind of
preparatory lesson and stimulation to prepare ourselves for the spiritual labors of
the Fast, having put aside our usual corrupt habits. First of all they present to us
the parable of the Publican and the Pharisee, and they call the week following
precursory. For those who desire to go off to do military battle, first ascertain the
time of the battle from the leaders, so that having cleaned and polished their
weapons, and preparing well all their other matters, and having removed all
obstacles from their path, they earnestly go forth to their labors, taking the
necessary supplies. Often before battle they tell anecdotes and tales and parables
to incite their hearts to zeal, driving off idleness, fear, despair and other
inadequate feelings. So the divine Fathers herald the coming fast against the
armies of demons as a passion which holds fast our souls to cleanse ourselves of
the poison accumulated over a long period of time. Not yet possessing those 
benefits, let us strive to obtain them, and arming ourselves properly, so let us set
off to the labors of the Fast. Now the first weapon among the virtues is
repentance and humility. And the temptation to attain the greatest humility is
pride and arrogance. So they place before us first of all this present trustworthy
parable from the Divine Gospel. It encourages us to shun the desire for the pride
and arrogance of the Pharisee, and to cultivate the opposite desire of the
Publican for humility and repentance. For the greatest and most grievous passion
is pride and arrogance, since this is how the Devil fell from the heavens before
the morning star and was cast into darkness. Because of this Adam, the father of
our race, was driven from Paradise through partaking of the fruit. Through this
example the Holy Fathers encourage all not to be proud of their successes, but
always to be humble. For the Lord sets Himself against the proud, but He gives
grace to the humble. Better a man who has sinned, if he knows that he has
sinned and repents, than a man who has not sinned and thinks of himself as
righteous. For Christ said, “I say to you that the Publican went down to his
house justified rather than the Pharisee.” This parable reveals that no one should
exalt himself, even though he has done good deeds, but rather should always be
humble and pray from his heart to God, for even if he should fall into the most
serious sin, salvation is not far off
Through the prayers of all Thy holy Hymnographers,
O Christ our God, have mercy on us. Amen.
ODE VII
The appointed Canons from the Oktoechos. Then:
The Canon from the Triodion:
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the
tyrant to cry: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
Exalted by the works of self-justification, the Pharisee was grievously snared
in the nets of vainglory, boasting madly; but the Publican was lifted on high on
the light wings of humility, and drew near to God.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
Using humility as a ladder, the Publican was raised on high to the heights of
heaven; but by the putrid foolishness of pride the wretched Pharisee fell into the
abyss of Hades.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The enemy doth catch the righteous and despoil them through vainglory,
blinding sinners in the nets of despair. But let us emulate the Publican and hasten
to escape from both these evils.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
In our prayer before God, let us fall down with tears and fervent sighs,
emulating the Publican in his lofty humility; and singing in faith: “O God of our
fathers, blessed art Thou”.
Glory ..., Thou hast forewarned Thy disciples, O Master, teaching them not
to be lofty of wisdom, but to be numbered with those who are humble-minded.
Therefore, O Savior, in faith we cry aloud to Thee: O God of our fathers,
blessed art Thou.
Now & ever ..., O thou beauty of Jacob, divine Ladder which of old he
beheld stretching from earth to heaven, thou holy Virgin, who hath brought
down from on high God made flesh, and doth bring mortal man up to heaven.
Katavasia: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, *
the divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our
Fathers, Blessed art Thou.
ODE VIII
The appointed Canons from the Oktoechos. Then:
The Canon from the Triodion:
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ,
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we exalt throughout all ages.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
The humble-minded sighing of the Publican found the mercy of the Lord,
and he was saved; but by the evil tongue of boasting, the Pharisee fell from
righteousness.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
O ye faithful, let us avoid the self-will of the Pharisee; who called himself
pure, rather let us strive to emulate the Publican’s goodness, who gained
forgiveness with humility.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O ye faithful, let us utter the words of the Publican in the holy temple,
“God be merciful,” that with him we may obtain forgiveness, and be delivered
from the vile boasting of the Pharisee.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
Let us all emulate the sighing of the Publican and, speaking to God with
warm tears, let us cry out: “O Lover of mankind, we have sinned, but in Thy
merciful compassion, do Thou cleanse and save us.”
Refrain: Let us bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the Lord!
God accepted the groaning of the Publican and having justified him, hath
shown unto us all, that He is quickly turned to compassion by the sighings and
tears of those who ask for the forgiveness of sins.
Now & ever ..., I know of no other intercessor save thee, I offer thee, O
pure and all-immaculate One, as my mediator before Him Whom thou didst
bear. Do thou show me to be free from all that doth grieve me.
Refrain: We praise, bless and worship the Lord, chanting and supremely
exalting Him throughout all ages.
Katavasia: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, *
and He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.
And then we chant the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (the Magnificat)
ODE IX
The appointed Canons from the Oktoechos. Then:
The Canon from the Triodion:
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders
of Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the
Word Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we
magnify and thee we call blessed.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
Christ hath set before us as a path to exaltation and an image of salvation,
the humility of the Publican: which, let us strive after by rejecting disdainful pride
and gaining God’s mercy through humble-mindedness.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Let us cast away pride and learn the righteousness of the humble-minded;
let us not seek to justify ourselves, but rather let us abhor the delusion of
vainglory, and with the Publican let us pray to God.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
Let us offer the Creator entreaties for mercy, as did the Publican,. Let us
avoid the ungrateful prayers of the Pharisee and the boastful words with which
he judged his neighbor, that we may gain God’s mercy and light.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
Weighed down by a great multitude of sins, I have surpassed the Publican in
an excess of evil, having embraced the self-adulating madness of the Pharisee,
wherefore I am utterly devoid of all that is good: O Lord, spare me.
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.
O Lord, grant blessedness to those who for Thy sake are poor in spirit, and
who follow Thy teachings, bringing unto Thee a contrite heart. Receive and save
them who worship Thee.
Glory ..., May we never pray unto Thee as did the Pharisee, may we enter
the Temple justified by sighing and tears, with a heart that is broken and
humbled, laying aside the heavy yoke of sin and thus be cleansed.
Now & ever ..., Grant us to hymn, glorify, and bless thee, to worthily honor
thee, O most pure one; glorifying thy birth-giving, O only-blessed one, for thou
art the praise of Orthodox Christians, and their divinely-acceptable intercessor
before God
Katavasia: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit
leap for joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor
the holy feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O
Theotokos, thou pure Ever-Virgin.
The small litany:
Then, “Holy is our God ...”: (Thrice)
Exapostilarion for the Resurrection Gospel of the week, then:
Glory ..., from the Triodion, in Tone III:
Let us flee from the wicked boasting of the Pharisee, * and learn the noble
humility of the Publican, * that we may be exalted and cry aloud with him unto
God: * Be merciful unto Thy servants, O Christ our Savior, * Who wast willingly
born from a Virgin, * who hast endured the Cross and with Thyself raised up the
world ** by Thy divine power. 
Now & ever ..., Theotokion from the Triodion:
The Maker of creation and the God of all, * took flesh from thine undefiled
womb, O all-hymned Theotokos, * renewing the whole of my corrupted nature.
* As thou wast before childbirth, * so wast thou left after childbirth. * Therefore
we all praise thee with faith ** and we cry: Rejoice! Glory of the world.
On the Aposticha, 4 Resurrection Stichera, in the Tone of the week:
Then 4 Stichera from the Triodion, in Tone VI:
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and
flute.
Brethren, let us not pray like the Pharisee: * for he who doth exalt himself
shall be humbled. * Let us humble ourselves before God, * and with fasting cry
aloud as did the Publican: * “God be merciful to us sinners”.
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.
In Tone III: Understand, O my soul, the difference between the Publican
and the Pharisee, * hate the haughty words of the one, and eagerly imitate the
contrite prayer of the other, crying aloud: ** “O God cleanse me a sinner and
have mercy on me”.
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of
all Thy wonders.
The Pharisee, overcome with vainglory, * and the Publican, bowed down in
repentance, * approached Thee the only Master. * The one boasted and was
deprived of blessings, * while the other kept silent and was found worthy of gifts.
* Confirm me, O Christ God, * in these his cries of sorrow, ** for Thou art the
Lover of mankind.
Verse: I will be glad and rejoice in Thee, I will chant unto Thy name, O
Most High.
O ye faithful, let us hate the boastful words of the Pharisee * and emulate
the contrite prayer of the Publican. * Let us not think proud thoughts, but
humbling ourselves in contrition let us cry: ** God be merciful to our sins.
Glory ..., From the Triodion, in Tone VIII:
O Lord, Thou hast condemned the Pharisee * who justified himself by
boasting of his works, * and Thou hast justified the Publican who humbled
himself * and with cries of sorrow begged for mercy. * For Thou dost reject
proud-minded thoughts, * but dost not despise a contrite heart. * Therefore
humbled we fall down before Thee * who hast suffered for our sake: ** Grant us
forgiveness and great mercy. 
Now & ever ..., in Tone II:
Most Blessed art Thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him Who
became incarnate of thee is Hades led captive, * Adam recalled, the curse
annulled, Eve set free, death slain, * and we are given life. Wherefore, we cry
aloud in praise: * Blessed art Thou, O Christ God, ** Who hast been thus wellpleased, glory to Thee.
Then the Great Doxology, and after it the appointed Resurrection Troparion:
Before 1st Hour: Glory ..., Now & ever ..., Gospel Sticheron for the week.
AT LITURGY
Typika and Beatitudes: 6 from the Tone of the week, 4 from ODE VI:
The Publican along with the Pharisee ran the race of life, but the one was
overcome by high-mindedness and shipwrecked, while the other was saved by
humility.
Changing to a humble course of life, let us emulate the fervent wisdom of
the Publican and flee the deadening conceit of the Pharisee; and we shall live.
Glory ..., The Pharisee passed his life in virtue and the Publican in sin; but
the former was brought low by his pride, while the latter was raised on high by
his humble-mindedness.
Now & ever ..., I was formed naked in innocence and simplicity; but the
enemy hath clothed me in the raiment of transgressions and the grossness of the
flesh. But by thine intercessions, O Maiden, I have been saved.
Order of Troparia & Kontakia as follows (for temple dedicated to a saint)
Troparion for the Sunday Tone:
Troparion for the Temple :
Glory ..., Kontakion of the Temple :
Now & ever ..., Kontakion from the Triodion, in Tone IV
Let us flee from the proud speaking of the Pharisee * and learn the humility
of the Publican, * and with groaning let us cry unto the Savior: * Be merciful to
us, ** for Thou alone art ready to forgive.
Prokeimenon, in the Tone of the week:
2nd EPISTLE TO IMOTHY: (3:10-15)
My Child Timothy: Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life,
purpose, faith, longsuffering, charity, patience, Persecutions, afflictions, which
came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I endured:
but out of them all the Lord delivered me. Yea, and all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse
and worse, deceiving, and being deceived. But continue thou in the things which
thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned
them; And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able
to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus
Alleluia in the Tone of the week:
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE 18:10-14
The Lord spake a parable saying: Two men went up into the temple to pray;
the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus
with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes
of all that I possess. And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so
much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be
merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man went down to his house justified
rather than the other: for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he
that humbleth himself shall be exalted.
Communion Verse: Praise Ye God in His Saints ...,